Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) Workshop

UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus

A Museum Visitors Classification Based On Behavioral and
Demographic Features
Moayad Mokatren

Veronika Bogina

University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
moayad.mokatren@gmail.com

University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
sveron@gmail.com

Alan Wecker

Tsvi Kuflik

University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
ajwecker@gmail.com

University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il
other side, personalization is challenging in the cultural heritage
setting, since most people do not tend to visit museums frequently.
According to Ardissono et al. [5] new trends in technologies
together with the research in cultural heritage about museum visitors, have opened new directions in personalization research. This
can contribute to improving data visualization, finding users with
similar interests and preferences, user’s collaboration and content
adaptation. Understanding who visits the museum, their behaviors
and the goal of the visit can play an important role in the design of
museums’ mobile guide that enhances the visit experience.
When two different people enter the museum for the first time,
should they follow the same path through the museum? Are they interested in the same exhibits? Should they get the same explanation
about the exhibits or the same explanation regarding recommendation they got from the system? If the museum visitors’ type could
be known before they enter the museum, their museum visit experience (and post visit) might be richer given the limited time they
have in the museum.
Our exploratory study aims to understand the museum visitors’
types according to their demographic data and behavioral signals
during their visit. Such findings can enhance the museum visit experience by adapting the delivered content to the visitors according
to their model/personality. Furthermore, the findings can help to
mitigate museum visit fatigue (where one gets tired when walking
around a specific museum) as well as explain both the users’ behaviors and the recommendations that interactive museum guide
systems provide to the visitor.
In the paper, we first review some related work, then we explain
what research methods were used in our research. After that results
are presented and explained, and finally we discuss contributions,
limitations and ideas for future work.

ABSTRACT
This paper describes an exploratory study that attempts to classify
museum visitors by taking into consideration indoor behavior and
demographic features. We discuss different approaches of using
such data for improving the user experience in the museum. Moreover, we try to explain user’s behavior by creating different user
groups using a novel data set. Our findings indicate that knowing
user age, education and her museum visits frequency, together with
the current visit signals (total standing time and listening to a mobile guide time) can be used for visitors classification that might be
useful in designing new intelligent user interfaces that can improve
the visitor’s indoor experience.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → User models;

KEYWORDS
User Modeling, Clustering, Cultural Heritage, Museum Interactions
ACM Reference Format:
Moayad Mokatren, Veronika Bogina, Alan Wecker, and Tsvi Kuflik. 2019.
A Museum Visitors Classification Based On Behavioral and Demographic
Features. In 27th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization
Adjunct (UMAP’19 Adjunct), June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 4, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323864

1

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

Over the last two decades, personalization has been a vougish area
of research in cultural heritage [5]. On one side, with the hype of
the Internet of Things and wireless technology, researchers had
abundant access to data, this allowed visitors to improve the prior,
post and during-the-visit experience [13]. People have different
interests, knowledge, goals and preferences in their visit. On the

2

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6711-0/19/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323864

RELATED WORK

Understanding museum visitors, their behaviors and the goal of
the visit can play a crucial role in the design of museums’ mobile
guide that enhances the visit experience. For example according to
[7], the visitors’ social context has an impact on their museum visit
experience and knowing the social context may allow a system to
provide socially aware services to the visitors (though social data
is outside the context of the data reviewed).

383

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) Workshop

2.1

UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus

3

Visitors Types

Museum visitors can be classified by various characteristics: groups
they belong to [10]; their style of looking at the exhibits and moving
in the museum [6, 14, 15]; a combination of demographic features
(age), context and user’s expertise [12]; and their experience [9].
Falk and Dierking [9] and Falk [8] tried to understand the visitor
and the whole visit experience as well as post-visit experience. They
initially proposed the idea of visitor "identity" and identified five,
distinct, identity-related categories: (1) Explorers - Visitors who
are curiosity driven with a generic interest in the content of the
museum; (2) Facilitators - Visitors who are socially motivated; (3)
Professional/Hobbyists - Visitors who feel a close tie between the
museum content and their professional or hobbyist passions;(4) Experience Seekers - Visitors who are motivated to visit because they
perceive the museum as an important destination and (5) Rechargers - Visitors who are primarily seeking to have a contemplative,
spiritual and/or restorative experience. These have been enhanced
with addition identities such as pilgrims and affinity seekers.
Prior to [9], ethno methodologists [15] proposed four types of
museum visiting styles. Starting from ethnographic observations of
the behavior of a number of visitors in several museums, they found
that visitors’ movements may be compared to the behavior of four
typical animals, and they proposed using this strategy as a way of
classifying the style of a visitor. They suggest that the ANT visitor
tends to follow a specific path and spends a lot of time observing
almost all the exhibits; the FISH visitor spends most of the time
moving around the center of the room and usually avoids looking at
exhibits’ details; the BUTTERFLY visitor does not follow a specific
path but rather is guided by the physical orientation of the exhibits
and stops frequently to look for more information (but not deeply);
and, the GRASSHOPPER visitor seems to have a specific preference
for some pre-selected exhibits and spends time observing them
while tending to ignore the others.
Zancanaro et al. [16] and later Kuflik et al. [11] tried to identify
and predict the user type, according to the Veron and Levasseur’s
model, on the initial observations of a user during the museum
visit. They used Recurrent Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and KMeans methods in their conducted experiment to classify museum
visitors to different types. They found that they can predict, with
high accuracy, in the early stages of the visit a BUTTERFLY and
GRASSHOPPER type behavior, while FISH and ANT type prediction
improve with the visit, it is not easy to predict them from the
beginning, taking time to catch patterns in their sequence of actions
with exhibits.
Dean [6] identifies three types of visitors, according to their
interests in the exhibits. The first type is characterized by people
that move quickly in the museum, without showing interest in the
exhibits. The second one contains people that show interest in the
specific exhibits that attract them. And the last and minor one, are
visitors who thoroughly examine exhibitions and pay attention to
every label and detail.
The novelty of our study, beyond the current state of the art, is
in classification of visitors using their behavior during the museum
visit, considering not only users’ behavioral signals during the visit,
but also their demographic related features, which, to the best of
our knowledge, has not been examined before.

RESEARCH METHOD

In order to understand the museum visitors’ behaviors and their
visiting style, we used quantitative and qualitative data collected
before and during museum visits. The study was conducted at the
University’s Archaeological museum. To collect the data, 47 visitors
(18 males and 29 females) were recruited as participants. Their age
ranged from 19 to 70 (mean=42, median=40, SD=17).

3.1

Features

The participants filled in a personal questionnaire before the visit
and then used a museum mobile guide that identified the location
of the visitor using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacons whenever they were in proximity to an exhibit, providing us with their
location at any time of their visit. From such data together with
the interaction with the mobile guide we can derive the following
features:
• Demographic related features
– Museum visitor’s age.
– Visitor’s gender (Male/Female) (boolean variable).
– Education level (no education, high school, bachelor, master, PhD) (categorical variable).
• Museum visit related features
– Number of visits a year to museums or archaeological sites
(never, once a year, between 2 and 5, between 6 and 10,
more than 10) (categorical variable).
– Whether this is the first visit to this museum or not (boolean
variable).
– Number of visited exhibits (without duplicates).
– Listening time - how much time user spends on listening
explanations about the exhibit on the mobile guide.
– Standing time - how much time user stands near the exhibit.

3.2

Method

We aimed to identify groups of similar visitors, based on their
behavior and personal characteristics. For that purpose we represented the visitors by a 8-feature vectors (described above) and
applied KMeans clustering for identifying similar groups, with several different K values. KMeans[3] is an unsupervised method for
classifying data. Basically, if each visitor is represented by the vector of features, the goal is to find the closest mean cluster, where k
indicates the number of clusters. In our experiment we tried various
values of K=2,3,4,5 and found that with K=3 we could see three
interesting groups, which as a result of our manual analysis of the
different groups, we were able to explain.

4

RESULTS

After running K-Means with three clusters (K=3), and assuming
that all the members in each cluster/group share similar behaviors,
we had to identify each cluster/group identity and try to explain its
visiting style. For that purpose we used charts to check relations
between different variables. We checked all the possible pairs and
in this paper we will refer only to charts with interesting relations.
For simplicity let’s recognize each group using its visualization
color: blue, orange and green.

384

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) Workshop

UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus

Figure 1: Has master vs total listen time in minutes.

Figure 4: Has master vs visit duration in minutes.

Figure 2: Age vs start hour (.5 is after 30 minutes past).

Figure 5: Visit once a year vs visit duration in minutes.

Figure 3: Start hour vs visit duration in minutes.

Figure 6: Visit duration (minutes) vs total listen time (minutes).

From Figure 1 we can conclude that the green visitors are the
ones that obtained Master degree. According to Figure 2 the blue
visitors, younger than other visitors, tend to start their visit at
later hours than other groups. From Figure 3 it is clear that the
orange visitors, that do not have graduate degree, tend to spend less
time in the museum. Also they visit around noon time - probably
students that enter the museum during the lunch break - these
visitors can possibly be an audience to engaging activities. The
green visitors which are characterized by having a graduate degree
may be a target for personalized delivery of content, according to
their preferences and behavior, given the diversity of the group.

From Figure 5 we can learn that the "oranges" visit museum once
a year. But still, according to Figure 7, they succeeded in reaching
many exhibits, wandering around, without listening to the museum
guide system (Figure 6). In addition, we have used non-parametric
Kruskal-Wallis[2] test (since our data is mostly categorical, and also
continuous data is not in Normal distribution) to check a difference
between the three visitors’ groups according to features that were
used. In case of statistically significant difference, we have applied
post-hoc Dunn’s test [1] to examine a correlation between the
groups and to understand which group is different. Results can be
seen in Table 1 with the medians of features and with statistically

385

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) Workshop

UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus

the fact that most people visit museum only once. In such cases by
only knowing demographic features it would be interesting to see
whether they also follow some pattern that can contribute for users
classification and improving their experience, but this is a topic for
future work.

6

For us, as researchers, it is important to understand a user’s behavior, in order to be able to explain back an interaction with the
system (mobile museum guide, recommendations for exhibits, and
personalized explanations about the exhibits). We believe that understanding behavioral signals during the visit together with the
previous knowledge about the visitor, mainly age, education and
frequency of visiting museums can contribute deeply.
It would be interesting to perform the same study in a bigger
museum with a more heterogeneous population and see what such
signals can tell us about users. Furthermore, use such classification for providing "personalized" - ( i.e. based upon the classification group) - explanations about the exhibits in the museum and
check for differences in the on-site experience between the different groups. In addition, we would like to ask participants to fill
in a personality questionnaire in order to try and find correlation
between our classifications, Veron and Levasseur’s model, and the
Big Five personality traits.

Figure 7: Visit duration (minutes) vs number of visited exhibits.

Table 1: Statistically significant features in clusters

significant differences. The group that was not correlated with the
others after applying post-hoc, is marked in the relevant group color.
The Green group visitors are different in their age (older than the
others), education (graduated) and their previous visit experience.
The Blue group visitors have the lowest level of education among
the groups. While the Orange ones: the middle level of education,
though their standing and listening to the mobile guide times are
significantly lower than the other groups times. We can conclude
that knowing age, education and number of museum visits even
before the museum visit can contribute to identifying users’ type
and to improve their experience.

5

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by THE ISRAEL SCIENCE FOUNDATION (grant No. 262/2017)

REFERENCES
[1] 2019. Dunn’s Test. https://www.pydoc.io/pypi/scikit-posthocs-0.3.7/autoapi/
_posthocs/index.html. (2019). [Online; accessed 10-Jan-2019].
[2] 2019. Kruskal-Wallis Test. https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/
scipy.stats.kruskal.html. (2019). [Online; accessed 10-Jan-2019].
[3] 2019. sklearn.cluster.KMeans. http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.cluster.KMeans.html/. (2019). [Online; accessed 10-Jan-2019].
[4] 2019. The Ant and the Grasshopper. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
The_Ant_and_the_Grasshopper. (2019). [Online; accessed 10-Jan-2019].
[5] Liliana Ardissono, Tsvi Kuflik, and Daniela Petrelli. 2012. Personalization in
cultural heritage: the road travelled and the one ahead. User modeling and
user-adapted interaction 22, 1-2 (2012), 73–99.
[6] David Dean. 2002. Museum exhibition: Theory and practice. Routledge.
[7] Eyal Dim and Tsvi Kuflik. 2015. Automatic detection of social behavior of museum
visitor pairs. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 4, 4 (2015),
17.
[8] John H Falk. 2016. Identity and the museum visitor experience. Routledge.
[9] John H Falk and Lynn D Dierking. 2000. Learning from museums: Visitor experiences and the making of meaning. Altamira Press.
[10] Eilean Hooper-Greenhill. 1999. Education, communication and interpretation:
towards a critical pedagogy in museums. The educational role of the museum 2
(1999), 3–27.
[11] Tsvi Kuflik, Zvi Boger, and Massimo Zancanaro. 2012. Analysis and prediction
of museum visitors’ behavioral pattern types. (2012), 161–176.
[12] Lukáš Najbrt and Jana Kapounová. 2014. Categorization of museum visitors as
part of system for personalized museum tour. International Journal of Information
and Communication Technologies in Education 3, 1 (2014), 17–27.
[13] Francesco Piccialli and Angelo Chianese. 2017. The internet of things supporting
context-aware computing: a cultural heritage case study. Mobile Networks and
Applications 22, 2 (2017), 332–343.
[14] Beverly Serrell. 2015. Exhibit labels: An interpretive approach. Rowman & Littlefield.
[15] Eliséo Véron and Martine Levasseur. 1989. Ethnographie de l’exposition: l’espace, le
corps et le sens. Centre Georges Pompidou, Bibliothèque publique d’information.
[16] Massimo Zancanaro, Tsvi Kuflik, Zvi Boger, Dina Goren-Bar, and Dan Goldwasser.
2007. Analyzing museum visitors’ behavior patterns. In International Conference
on User Modeling. Springer, 238–246.

DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

In this study we attempted to classify museum visitors by using a
combination of demographic features and behavioral signals during
the museum visit and explain this classification. We identified 3
groups of visitors. Similar to the work of Dean [6], and studies
of Zancanaro et al. [16] and Kuflik et al. [11] where from the duration perspective, no significant statistical difference was found
between FISH and GRASSHOPPER types. While scrutinizing the
definition of this types, the differentiation of these types can be
pretty vague: both of them avoid details of most of the exhibits,
moving around in different trajectories. Other types are more easily
separated. Even Aesop’s Fables talk about significant difference
between GRASSHOPPER and the ANT[4]. After statistical analysis
we identified few features according to which three clusters are
different: age, education, number of museum visits, standing and listening times. We used a data set that is available to the community
upon request from the authors.
There are three main limitations in our study. First of all the
number of participants is not large - 47 persons participated in
the study. Another limitations is biased data, most of the participants, are students at University. Another limitation is related to

386

