A TECHNIQUE FOR STUDYING THE BEHAVIOR
OF MUSEUM VISITORS
L. C. NIELSEN*
The Laboratory School, University of Chicago
1. THE NEED FOR COMPREHENSIVE VISITOR STUDY

It is an interesting feature of the museum educational situation that although the activities of visitors are physically rather
narrowly prescribed by aisles and exhibit fronts, the visitors
themselves nevertheless have remained the least known, the
most unpredictable, and the most difficult to study of all the
aspects of museum work.
Technical problems of collecting, preserving, mounting, lighting, display, architecture, and even lecturing have been largely
met and solved, per se. But these solutions may or may not be
successful and meaningful when viewed from the standpoint of
visitor reactions. Intended exhibit sequences may not be
followed. Visitors may not stop long enough at each exhibit
to derive any measure of meaning from it. The most significant
exhibits may not receive the most attention.
The only method that can be employed to determine how
museum visitors react is to observe the reactions of the visitor
himself, in the context of specific museum situations, which
may or may not be common to many museums. In other words,
not only is it important to devise techniques leading to generalizations applicable to typical situations (such as identifying
a general tendency to turn to the right), but also methods must
be found whereby each museum can study its particular visitors
in the light of its unique functions, gaining an intimate knowledge
of their reactions to its distinctive techniques.
2. LIMITATIONS OF PAST APPROACHES

To the extent that museums have become aware of this problem, museum workers have not been attracted to the prospect of
taking notebook and stopwatch in hand and trailing hundreds of
visitors through the halls of their scientific or artistic storehouse
* Formerly Research Associate in Education, Museum of Science and
Industry, Chicago, Illinois.
103

104

The Journal of Educational Psychology

of culture. One need only turn to the records of the studies
carried on by Robinson and Melton and their staffs to obtain
an estimate of the labor which apparently lies in store for the
progressive museum worker who wishes to undertake a study of
the inuseum's constituency.
It is clear that although the trailing technique served admirably in the pioneer studies, it is not the final answer for any
general or intensive program of visitor study. Aside from, or
perhaps akin to, humanitarian considerations with respect to
the museum worker, a second drawback to the traditional technique is its cost. If there is to be any widespread study by
individual institutions, the research must fall within the scope
of their financial capacities. The cost of training and maintaining one or more staff members for the 'exclusive purpose of
trailing ten or twenty visitors a day until the hundreds of necessary cases have been accumulated would be a large item in most
museum budgets.
Thirdly, there is the consideration of the reliability of these
data once they are accumulated. Even an experienced observer
will often feel that he has more than he can easily or comfortably
handle as he attempts to time and characterize each stop-and-go
made by his 'case/ adjust his stop-watch, jot down his data
and keep the 'subject' in sight, while at the same time maintain- •
ing a discreet distance and an air of studied casualness.
These considerations in turn lead us to a fourth disadvantage
of the trailing technique—lack of efficiency. By the time the
observer has eliminated data for the 'cases' by whom he was
detected or who for some reason he found impossible to record
at all accurately, a day's work is not likely to yield him more than
twenty-odd complete records. In addition, the number of
aspects of visitor behavior that an observer can record in one
'round' is relatively limited. It would be virtually impossible
for him consistently to transcribe path, time of stay, labels
read, degree of physical participation in the exhibit (if operative),
and closeness or survey-character of the visitors' observation.
3. PROPOSAL OF A NEW TECHNIQUE

In the hope that it might prove useful to those interested in
determining what visitors do in any given room or exhibit of
their museum, this article is intended .as a report of an alternative

Studying the Behavior of Museum Visitors

105

technique of visitor observation which is proving quite successful
in the Museum of Science and Industry in.Chicago.
The procedure is essentially one of time-lapse photography.
A motion-picture camera equipped with single-exposure release
is mounted high in one corner of the room, concealed as much as
possible from visitor view. By means of a simple motor drive
and appropriate arrangement of cams, the single-exposure release
may be tripped at any pre-determined interval of time, and
pictures taken correspondingly at any desired rate, though a
range of from one to sixty frames per minute is the most generally
useful. The resulting film-strip, a series of snapshots of the
entire room, gives a truly candid, 'slow-motion' record of all
that occurred in the room during the photographic period—how
many visitors entered the room, or how many there were at any
given moment; where they went and in what sequence; how
they looked at the exhibits; how long they stayed at each exhibit
or in the room as a whole.
a. Implementation of the Photographic Technique
This procedure has been used in the Museum of Science and
Industry in connection with visitor study in an exhibit designed
to tell the Story of Magnetism (see Fig, 1). The room in question
is small, only thirty feet square; yet the smallest angle which
will include all the public area (aisles and exhibit-fronts) is
about 70°. The average movie camera has a field only slightly
better than 20°. At the time the technique was first implemented, war conditions had rendered wide-angle lenses with
which to experiment completely unavailable. Even now a lense
capable of covering this wide an angle without appreciably
cutting down speed is difficult to obtain. The answer to the
problem of compressing the 70° field occupied by the room into
the 20° field covered by the camera was found through the use
of a large convex mirror (aperture fifteen inches, radius of
curvature thirty inches), the camera being pointed directly at
the mirror, and focused on the virtual image of the room formed
by and behind the mirror surface. The slight distortion of
image caused by this arrangement offered no real handicap in the
interpretation or analysis of the film.
The trial runs were made on 35 mm ultra-speed film (the camera
and timing mechanism for the purpose were kindly lent by

106

The Journal of Educational Psychology

Mr. Herbert A. Thelen of the University of Chicago Department
of Education), with a #2 photoflood in the regular central
overhead installation, and the regular fluorescent fixtures illuminating the exhibits. The intervals between exposures were
varied from five to fifteen seconds. For this particular exhibit,
it was found that seven and one-half seconds was the most
useful interval, not too slow to catch significant transitions of

Fio. 1.—Diagrammatic representation of photographic arrangement in exhibit.

visitors from one exhibit to another, nor fast enough to cause
successive pictures to be nearly identical.
The seven and one-half second interval causes 35 mm film to be
used at the rate of thirty feet per hour. A 16 mm film, though
not as desirable, is satisfactory, and is consumed at the rate of
only twelve feet per hour. In either case, however, the cost
cannot be compared to that of an observer working an equal
length of time on a small fraction of the number of cases that
the film is able to record completely.

Studying the Behavior of Museum Visitors

107

b. Transcription of Film Record
Though by no means exhaustive of the possibilities, discussion of the type of analyses so far made with these film records
might be of interest, as an indication of the versatility and wide
range of usefulness of this technique.
Since it was anticipated that the data on the film would be
'gone over' from a number of different standpoints and for
different purposes, the first step was to eliminate the necessity
for continuous and repeated use of projection encumbrances.
This was done by 'transcribing' the film record onto tabular
form, as follows (see Fig. 2):
Each horizontal line of the square-ruled sheet is used to represent one picture, or frame, of the film strip. Each vertical
column represents a specific location in the room. Any person
identified at a particular location on a particular exposure is
assigned a tally in the appropriate square of the sheet. If the
person is a man, this tally takes somewhat the form of a '9';
if a woman, '6'; if a child, a small 'i.' Tots under four years of
age are not counted. If a given person appears on one picture
only, he receives the corresponding tally and that is all. But
if this person is identified through several successive frames,
then the tallies made for him are all connected by a line, so that
his path vertically along the sheet corresponds to his path
in the room.
c. Treatment of Data
Several types of analysis immediately suggest themselves.
Mere inspection of this record reveals much concerning the general paths followed and population densities in various parts
of the room.
Frequency distributions for the times, of stay at each exhibit
may easily be made, which in turn enable the determination
of the mean, median, and modal observation time for each
exhibit or for the room as a whole. These figures in turn may
be interpreted as indications of the attractiveness, difficulty,
' drawing-power,' or interest of the various exhibits. In addition,
an extremely powerful and suggestive device is that of identifying
quartiles or centiles of observation time, through which the
museum educator is provided with a basis of estimating what

108

The Journal of Educational Psychology

to

w

8

&MARKS

f

r

2(0

f

t.

170

Fio. 2.—Sample transcription of visitor paths from photographic record.

he may expect from different proportions of the public in the way
of attention and time spent.
The various paths identified may also be summarized and
classified, and generalizations made concerning routing. Further
experiments at guidance may be carried out and evaluated by

Studying the Behavior of Museum Visitors

109

this technique. Special analyses might also be made of children,
or of the behavior of men versus women, accompanied versus
lone, summer compared to winter, or morning compared to
afternoon visitors.
d. Validity and Limitations of the Technique
The analyses and types of inferences indicated above have
actually been carried out for the Magnetism Exhibit of the
Museum.
The routing studies corroborated subjective impressions that
visitors were not seeing the exhibit in proper sequence. Further
photographic studies with various experimental methods of
guidance provided quantitative bases for comparing the effectiveness of these methods.
The statistical analysis of time-of-stay-at-each-exhibit, revealing as it did variations in average time of from nine seconds to
one minute, and ranges of from five seconds to three and one-half
minutes per exhibit holds great educational implications, which
will be reported upon in a later paper.
The two chief factors influencing the validity of this method
of visitor study are accuracy and care of photographic technique,
and compromising at the right point between recording significant visitor motions and making efficient use of materials
and analyzing time. A sixteen-frame-per-second motion-picture
record would catch every movement made by a visitor; if head
and hand motions, for example, were considered to be significant
aspects of visitor behavior for a particular study, then this
speed might be an appropriate one. However, if only major
transitions between exhibits are desired for purposes of study,
the frequency of exposure can be decreased according to the characteristics of the public, and the discretion of the experimenter.
Practical limitations of photography for museum purposes are
felt mainly in connection with size, crowding, and illumination
of the room. The larger the room, the more difficult it becomes
to include all of it in the field of the camera. For this, only
wide-angle lenses, convex mirrors, or coordinate use of two
cameras can be suggested. When crowds become very dense,
visitors tend to obscure one another in perspective, and it is
difficult to identify and trace single visitors along the film record.
A good lense and use of 35 mm film for good resolution, and a high

110

The Journal of Educational Psychology

camera angle are good precautions in this respect, though it is
suggested that very crowded periods be avoided for traffic
studies, unless information concerning such situations is especially
desired. The problems of illumination are parallel to those met
in any indoor motion-picture photographic work; it will usually
be found necessary to supplement the regular lighting installations with some type of floodlight.
CONCLUSIONS

It is necessary to recognize that picture-analysis alone does
not yield a total picture of the visitor, but only of his behavior
in specific situations. Supplementing the picture record with
sound recording would provide still more complete information
concerning visitor reactions. But such questions as what factors
prompted the visitor to come, what was his emotional set or
state of fatigue at the time of his visit, and so forth, require
other techniques for their answer.
Such factors, however, though interesting, are extremely
variable and erratic, and—what is more important—not subject
to museum control. Study of them, except for ascertaining the
educational backgrounds and interests of the visitors, are not
likely to yield much that is useful as a basis for museum action.
The museum must take its visitors as they are—tired, hurried,
or uninterested—and seek ways of making their visits, short or
long, as fruitful educationally as possible. Studying visitor
reactions to the educational experiences within the museum is a
necessary first step in evaluating the extent of fruition of museum
educational efforts, and a necessary link between present practice and even better, more effective, practice.

