An	  analysis	  of	  visitors’	  length	  of	  stay	  through	  noninvasive	  Bluetooth	  
monitoring	  in	  the	  Louvre	  Museum	  
	  
a
Yuji	  Yoshimura ,	  Anne	  Krebsb,	  Carlo	  Rattia	  
	  

a	  SENSEable	  City	  Laboratory,	  Massachusetts	  Institute	  of	  Technology,	  77	  

Massachusetts	  Avenue,	  Cambridge,	  MA	  02139,	  USA;	  
	  

b	  Dominique-­‐Vivant	  Denon	  Research	  Centre,	  muse	  du	  Louvre,	  75058,	  Paris,	  Cedex	  

01,	  France;	  
	  
Abstract:	   Art	   Museums	   traditionally	   employ	   observations	   and	   surveys	   to	   enhance	  
their	  knowledge	  of	  visitors’	  behavior	  and	  experience.	  However,	  these	  approaches	  
often	   produce	   spatially	   and	   temporally	   limited	   empirical	   evidence	   and	  
measurements.	   Only	   recently	   has	   the	   ubiquity	   of	   digital	   technologies	  
revolutionized	   the	   ability	   to	   collect	   data	   on	   human	   behavior.	   Consequently,	   the	  
greater	  availability	  of	  large-­‐scale	  datasets	  based	  on	  quantifying	  visitors’	  behavior	  
provides	   new	   opportunities	   to	   apply	   computational	   and	   comparative	   analytical	  
techniques.	   In	   this	   paper,	   we	   attempt	   to	   analyze	   visitors’	   behavior	   in	   the	   Louvre	  
Museum	   from	   anonymized	   longitudinal	   datasets	   collected	   from	   noninvasive	  
Bluetooth	  sensors.	  We	  examine	  visitors’	  length	  of	  stay	  in	  the	  museum	  and	  consider	  
this	   relationship	   with	   occupation	   density	   around	   artwork.	   This	   data	   analysis	  
increases	   the	   knowledge	   and	   understanding	   of	   museum	   professionals	   related	   to	  
the	  experience	  of	  visitors.	  
	  
Introduction	  
	  
The	   recent	   development	   of	   emerging	   technologies	   and	   their	   rapid	   diffusion	   into	  
our	   daily	   life	   has	   caused	   a	   structural	   change	   in	   human	   behavior	   analysis.	   Indeed,	  
the	   ubiquitous	   presence	   of	   wired	   and	   wireless	   sensors	   in	   contemporary	   urban	  
environments	   produces	   an	   empirical	   record	   of	   individual	   activities	   at	   detailed	  
levels.	   In	   addition,	   to	   the	   ubiquity	   of	   this	   technology,	   computationally	   advanced	  
computer	   systems	   make	   accumulating	   large	   datasets	   of	   human	   behavior	   at	   high	  
frequencies	  possible-­‐sometimes	  even	  in	  real	  time.	  
	  
Contrary	  to	  the	  common	  use	  of	  such	  data-­‐collection	  technology,	  the	  data	  collection	  
of	  visitors’	  behaviors	  in	  large-­‐scale	  art	  museums	  has	  not	  advanced	  much	  over	  the	  
past	   few	   decades.	   The	   traditional	   pencil-­‐and-­‐paper	   based	   tracking	   method	   is	   still	  
widely	   used	   in	   the	   form	   of	   “timing	   and	   tracking”	   [1].	   Furthermore,	   many	   of	   the	  
emerging	  technologies	  don’t	  work	  appropriately	  in	  the	  museum	  setting	  for	  several	  
reasons:	  active	  mobile	  phone	  tracking	  with	  GPS	  [2]	  doesn’t	  work	  inside	  buildings	  
and	  passive	  mobile	  phone	  tracking	  [3,4]	  cannot	  distinguish	  visitors’	  presence	  and	  
movement	   between	   rooms	   because	   its	   detection	   range,	   based	   on	   the	   antenna’s	  
coverage,	  is	  too	  large.	  Video	  camera	  based	  tracking	  technologies	  are	  useful,	  but	  the	  
substantially	  higher	  cost	  do	  not	  allow	  for	  the	  necessary	  infrastructure	  in	  a	  museum	  
environment.	   RFID	   [5],	   ultra	   wideband	   [6]	   	   and	   mobile	   phone	   centered	   wifi	  
tracking	   method	   are	   promising,	   but	   they	   require	   visitors	   to	   be	   equipped	   with	  
certain	   devices	   or	   to	   download	   the	   proper	   application	   in	   advance.	   This	  

	  

1	  

participatory	  process	  prevents	  us	  from	  generating	  large-­‐scale	  datasets,	  which	  are	  
necessary	  for	  relevant	  analysis.	  
	  
For	   this	   purpose,	   this	   paper	   employs	   a	   Bluetooth	   detection	   technique	   [7-­‐10].	  
Bluetooth	   detection	   is	   unobtrusive,	   making	   use	   of	   the	   visitors’	   digital	   footprint	  
they	   unconsciously	   leave	   behind	   [11].	   Furthermore,	   these	   datasets	   can	   be	  
anonymized	  in	  order	  to	  protect	  the	  users’	  personal	  data.	  As	  a	  result,	  this	  technique	  
enables	  us	  to	  generate	  large-­‐scale	  datasets.	  Additionally,	  we	  can	  expect	  datasets	  to	  
be	  obtained	  without	  any	  behavioral	  bias.	  Participants	  might	  adapt	  their	  behaviors	  
if	   they	   become	   conscious	   of	   being	   observed.	   Furthermore,	   we	   can	   perform	   data	  
collection	   for	   a	   longer	   period	   than	   just	   one	   day	   or	   a	   few	   days,	   which	   is	   a	   typical	  
data	   collection	   technique,	   to	   form	   a	   hypothetical	   visitor,	   who	   can	   represent	   a	  
whole	  population.	  
	  
Thus,	   our	   methodology	   is	   to	   analyze	   “real”	   and	   large-­‐scale	   empirical	   data,	   which	   is	  
contrary	   to	   that	   of	   traditionally	   employed	   manual-­‐based	   methods.	   This	   proposed	  
method	   sheds	   light	   on	   unknown	   aspects	   of	   visitors’	   behaviors	   in	   terms	   of	   their	  
length	  of	  stay	  and	  the	  influence	  of	  the	  crowd	  over	  a	  visitor.	  
	  
Bluetooth	  tracking	  system	  in	  the	  Louvre	  Museum	  
	  
Bluetooth	  detection	  systems	  are	  widely	  used	  to	  track	  people	  inside	  buildings	  [10],	  
in	   urban	   settings	   [9],	   and	   to	   generate	   traffic	   information	   based	   on	   detecting	  
vehicles	   [12].	   Bluetooth	   detection	   systems	   work	   as	   follows:	   once	   a	   Bluetooth-­‐
activated	   mobile	   device	   enters	   the	   detectable	   area,	   the	   sensor	   continues	   to	   receive	  
the	   emitted	   signal	   from	   the	   mobile	   device	   until	   the	   signal	   disappears.	   Thus,	   the	  
sensor	  registers	  the	  time	  at	  which	  the	  signal	  of	  a	  mobile	  device	  appears,	  also	  called	  
check-­‐in	  time.	  Afterward,	  when	  the	  signal	  of	  a	  mobile	  device	  disappears,	  the	  sensor	  
records	   the	   check-­‐out	   time.	   Then	   the	   difference	   between	   each	   mobile	   device’s	  
check-­‐in	  and	  check-­‐out	  time	  can	  be	  calculated,	  which	  defines	  the	  length	  of	  stay	  at	  
the	  node.	  Similarly,	  by	  looking	  at	  the	  first	  check-­‐in	  time	  and	  the	  last	  check-­‐out	  time	  
over	  all	  nodes,	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  calculate	  how	  long	  a	  visitor	  stays	  in	  the	  Denon	  wing	  
of	   the	   Louvre	   museum.	   Such	   a	   series	   of	   check-­‐in	   and	   check-­‐out	   time	   data	  
registered	   by	   all	   the	   installed	   sensors	   makes	   it	   possible	   to	   construct	   a	   visitor’s	  
trajectory	   through	   the	   Denon	   wing	   of	   the	   museum,	   including	   their	   travel	   time	  
between	   nodes.	   All	   of	   this	   information	   can	   be	   collected	   without	   invading	   visitor’	  
privacy	   because	   Secure	   Hash	   Algorithm	   (SHA)	   encryption	   [13]	   is	   applied	   to	   each	  
sensors	  by	  converting	  each	  device’s	  MACID	  in	  to	  a	  unique	  identifier	  [7].	  
	  

	  

2	  

	  

Figure	   1.	   Location	   of	   eight	   sensors	   (E,	   D,	   V,	   B,	   S,	   G,	   C,	   P)	   indicating	   their	   approximating	  
sensing	  range.	  The	  arrow	  and	  its	  width	  represents	  visitors’	  flow	  between	  nodes.	  

	  
Eight	   Bluetooth	   sensors	   have	   been	   deployed	   throughout	   the	   Denon	   wing	   of	   the	  
museum,	   covering	   key	   places	   to	   capture	   visitors’	   behavior.	   These	   sensors	   were	  
placed	   along	   one	   of	   the	   busiest	   trails	   identified	   by	   Louvre	   Museum,	   which	   lead	  
visitors	   from	   the	   entrance	   to	   the	   Venus	   de	   Milo.	   The	   sensors	   are	   placed	   at	   the	  
Entrance	   Hall	   (E),	   Gallery	   Daru	   (D),	   Venus	   de	   Milo	   (V),	   Salle	   des	   Caryatides	   (C),	  
Sphinx	  (P),	  Great	  Gallery	  (B),	  Victory	  of	  Samothrace	  (S),	  and	  Salle	  des	  Verres	  (G).	  
The	   data	   collection	   was	   performed	   at	   different	   periods	   by	   a	   different	   number	   of	  
sensors	   during	   a	   five-­‐month	   period	   from	   April	   2010	   to	   August	   2010.	   After	   data	  
cleanup	   and	   data	   processing,	   which	   adjusted	   the	   data	   to	   remove	   any	  
inconsistencies,	  81,498	  unique	  devices	  were	  selected	  to	  be	  analyzed	  for	  this	  paper.	  
By	   comparing	   the	   number	   of	   detected	   mobile	   devices	   and	   ticket	   sales,	   we	   found	  
that,	   on	   average,	   8.2%	   of	   visitors	   had	   activated	  Bluetooth	   on	   their	   mobile	   phone.	  
Additionally,	   we	   previously	   uncovered	   visitors’	   transition	   probability	   between	  
nodes	  and	  their	  mobility	  patterns	  considering	  their	  length	  of	  stay	  in	  the	  museum	  
(see	   Figure	   1).	   Based	   on	   this	   previous	   study,	   this	   paper	   analyzes	   visitors’	   length	   of	  

	  

3	  

stay	   in	   each	   node	   as	   well	   as	   the	   entire	   duration	   of	   their	   visit,	   which	   is	   how	   this	  
study	  differs	  from	  the	  previous	  one.	  
	  
Analyzing	  three	  factors	  regarding	  length-­‐of-­‐stay	  in	  the	  museum	  
	  
We	  analyze	  three	  different	  factors	  related	  to	  visitors’	  length	  of	  stay	  in	  the	  museum.	  
The	  first	  factor	  relates	  to	  entry	  time,	  which	  can	  be	  used	  to	  assess	  the	  distribution	  
of	   visitors’	   length	   of	   stay	   in	   the	   museum	   depending	   on	   when	   they	   entered	   the	  
museum.	  The	  second	  factor	  provides	  visitors’	  length	  of	  stay	  at	  each	  specific	  node.	  
The	   third	   factor	   is	   the	   relationship	   between	   the	   length	   of	   stay	   at	   a	   specific	   node	  
and	  the	  number	  of	  visitors	  around	  the	  node	  (i.e.,	  density).	  
	  
The	  length	  of	  stay	  in	  the	  museum	  
	  

	  

(a)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  (b)	  
Figure	  2.	  (a)	  The	  number	  of	  unique	  node	  visited	  against	  the	  length	  of	  stay	  (b)	  The	  number	  
of	  total	  visited	  nodes	  against	  the	  length	  of	  stay.	  
	  

Figure	  2	  (a)	  shows	  that	  the	  median	  length	  of	  stay	  is	  very	  similar	  across	  all	  amounts	  
of	   unique	   visited	   nodes.	   We	   used	   a	   non-­‐parametric	   correlation	   analysis	  
(Spearman’s	   rank	   correlation	   coefficient)	   because	   the	   variables	   do	   not	   seem	   to	  
follow	   a	   normal	   distribution.	   We	   also	   include	   a	   series	   of	   boxplots	   to	   better	   explain	  
the	  relationship	  between	  variables.	  A	  very	  low	  correlation	  value	  (ρ = 0.073, p<2.2e16) suggests that there is no relationship between these two variables. That is, the
number of unique nodes visited seems to be independent of the length of stay. On the
other hand, Figure 2 (b) shows a different relationship between the length of stay and
the total amount of visited nodes. The correlation coefficient (ρ = 0.186, p-value<2.2e16) suggests a weak association between the two variables. Our interpretation is that
when people stay for a longer period inside the museum, they tend to limit the number
of visited nodes and prefer to dedicate more time to exploring those they visit
thoroughly (sometimes visiting them more than once), instead of visiting a higher
number of different nodes.
	  
We	   also	   examine	   a	   distribution	   of	   an	   average	   of	   visitors’	   length	   of	   stay	   in	   the	  
museum	   classified	   by	   the	   hour	   of	   the	   day	   they	   visit	   the	   museum.	   This	   analysis	  
reveals	   whether	   or	   not	   visitors’	   entry	   time	   affects	   their	   length	   of	   stay	   at	   the	  
museum.	   We	   divide	   a	   day	   of	   the	   week	   into	   two	   groups	   depending	   on	   the	   closing	  
	  

4	  

time	  of	  the	  museum.	  The	  first	  group	  consists	  of	  Monday,	  Thursday,	  Saturday	  and	  
Sunday,	  when	  the	  door	  closes	  at	  18:00	  and	  the	  second	  group	  includes	  Wednesday	  
and	  Friday,	  when	  the	  museum	  closes	  at	  21:45.	  
	  

15"ago&

16"ago&

19"ago&

average&

0:00:00

Visitor's entry time to the museum

00:00:00

30"abr&

5"may&

7"may&

30"jun&

2"jul&

7"jul&

9"jul&

13"ago&

18"ago&

average&

Visitor's entry time to the museum

20:00-21:00

14"ago&

19:00-20:00

12"ago&

18:00-19:00

8"jul&

17:00-18:00

5"jul&

01:12:00

16:00-17:00

4"jul&

15:00-16:00

8"may&

3"jul&

14:00-15:00

6"may&

1"jul&

13:00-14:00

3"may&

9"may&

11:00-12:00

2"may&

02:24:00

12:00-13:00

1:12:00

03:36:00

9:00-10:00

2:24:00

04:48:00

10:00-11:00

3:36:00

Average length of stay in the museum

visitor's length of stay vs entry time to the museum

9:
00
-1
10 0:0
:0
0
01
11 1:0
:0
0
01
12 2:0
:0
0
01
13 3:0
:0
0
014
14
:
:0 00
01
15 5:0
:0
0
016
16
:
:0 00
017
:0
0

Average length of stay in the museum

visitor's length of stay vs entry time to the museum

4:48:00

	  

(a)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  (b)	  
Figure	   3.	   (a)	   The	   distribution	   of	   the	   average	   stay	   time	   by	   visiting	   hour	   on	   Monday,	  
Thursday,	  Saturday	  and	  Sunday.	  (b)	  The	  distribution	  of	  the	  average	  stay	  time	  by	  visiting	  
hour	  on	  Wednesday	  and	  Friday.	  
	  

Figure	   3	   (a)	   presents	   a	   clear	   tendency	   that	   the	   length	   of	   stay	   time	   decreases	  
toward	  the	  closing	  hours	  of	  the	  museum.	  The	  earlier	  a	  visitor	  enters	  the	  museum,	  
the	  longer	  that	  visitor	  tends	  to	  stay	  in	  the	  museum.	  This	  indicates	  that	  the	  closing	  
time	  of	  the	  museum	  works	  as	  a	  constraint	  to	  limit	  the	  length	  of	  visitors’	  time	  in	  the	  
museum.	   Thus,	   visitors	   seem	   to	   stay	   longer	   within	   their	   limited	   available	   time	   in	  
order	  to	  maximize	  their	  benefits.	  
	  
Conversely,	   the	   results	   on	   Wednesday	   and	   Friday	   show	   a	   different	   tendency	   of	  
visitors	   (see	   Figure	   3	   (b)).	   As	   with	   the	   previous	   analysis,	   we	   can	   observe	   a	  
tendency	  that	  the	  length	  of	  stay	  at	  the	  museum	  decreases	  with	  the	  advance	  of	  the	  
time.	  However,	  the	  decrease	  in	  length	  of	  stay	  is	  slightly	  mitigated	  in	  the	  middle	  of	  
the	   day.	   Just	   after	   the	   opening	   of	   the	   museum	   (i.e.,	   10:00-­‐11:00),	   the	   length	   of	   stay	  
is	  greatest,	  but	  in	  the	  late	  afternoon	  (i.e.,	   17:00-­‐18:00),	   the	   length	   of	   stay	   increases	  
slightly.	  This	  data	  makes	  us	  suppose	  there	  might	  be	  two	  kinds	  of	  visitors.	  That	  is,	  
while	  some	  intend	  to	  maximize	  their	  utility	  (e.g.,	  staying	  time)	  within	  the	  limited	  
time	   the	   museum	   is	   open	   by	   visiting	   earlier,	   others	   try	   to	   take	   advantage	   of	   the	  
longer	  hours	  and	  wait	  until	  the	  evening	  to	  visit.	  
	  
All	  of	  these	  analyses	  and	  results	  indicate	  that	  the	  time	  visitors	  enter	  can	  be	  used	  to	  
predict	   visitors’	   length	   of	   stay	   in	   the	   museum,	   but	   their	   length	   of	   stay	   in	   the	  
museum	   doesn’t	   have	   any	   correlation	   with	   the	   number	   of	   visited	   nodes	   over	   the	  
course	   of	   their	   visit.	   While	   the	   longer	   length	   of	   stay	   slightly	   suggests	   a	   larger	  
number	   of	   visited	   nodes,	   their	   relationship	   is	   not	   significant.	   Such	   a	   result	   is	  
particularly	  useful	  for	  the	  daily	  management	  of	  peak	  periods	  and	  rush	  hours	  by	  the	  
staff.	  
	  
The	  length	  of	  stay	  at	  each	  node	  

	  

5	  

	  
We	   examine	   how	   long	   a	   visitor	   stays	   at	   each	   node	   in	   a	   disaggregated	   way	   and	  
uncover	  the	  feature	  of	  each	  node	  by	  comparing	  the	  analysis	  of	  an	  accumulation	  of	  
individual	  visitor’s	  behavior.	  
	  
Our	   preliminary	   analysis	   shows	   that	   node	   E	   and	   node	   S	   have	   a	   much	   longer	   length	  
of	   stay	   than	   the	   other	   nodes.	   The	   median	   length	   of	   stay	   at	   nodes	   E	   and	   S	   are	  
00:16:29	  and	  00:19:03,	  respectively,	  while	  the	  average	  length	  of	  stay	  at	  the	  other	  
nodes	   is	   00:03:14.	   Node	   E	   is	   situated	   in	   the	   ticket	   sale	   desk,	   indicating,	  
unsurprisingly,	  that	  visitors	  may	  wait	  for	  a	  long	  queue	  in	  order	  to	  purchase	  a	  ticket.	  
Winged	   Victory	   of	   Samothrace,	   where	   sensor	   S	   is	   located,	   is	   one	   of	   the	   most	  
attractive	  exhibits	  in	  the	  museum-­‐together	  with	  the	  huge	  staircase	  in	  front	  of	  the	  
exhibit.	   Besides,	   many	   visitors	   use	   the	   stairs	   as	   a	   improvised	   chair	   to	   take	   a	   rest	  
during	  their	  visit.	  Those	  two	  factors	  make	  node	  E	  and	  node	  S	  different	  from	  other	  
nodes.	   We	   speculate	   that	   the	   unique	   uses	   for	   these	   spaces	   results	   in	   their	   much	  
longer	   length	   of	   stay,	   and	   this	   fact	   motivates	   us	   to	   exclude	   these	   nodes	   from	   our	  
following	  analysis.	  
	  

	  

(a)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  (b)	  
Figure	   4.	  (a)	  The	  boxplot	  of	  the	  length	  of	  stay	  in	  each	  node.	  (b)	  The	  comparative	  visitor	  
decay	  curves.	  
	  

Figure	   4	   (a)	   presents	   the	   boxplot	   of	   visitors’	   length	   of	   stay	   at	   each	   node.	   We	   can	  
observe	   that	   two	   groups	   exist:	   node	   V	   (Venus	   de	   Milo),	   node	   C	   (Salle	   des	  
Caryatides),	  and	  node	  B	  (Great	  Gallery)	  experience	  a	  longer	  stay;	  node	  D	  (Gallery	  
Daru),	   node	   P	   (Sphinx),	   and	   node	   G	   (Salle	   des	   Verres)	   experience	   a	   shorter	   stay.	  
While	  the	  median	  length	  of	  stay	  for	  the	  former	  group	  is	  03:02,	  the	  median	  for	  the	  
latter	  is	  00:44.	  Among	  these	  nodes	  the	  visitors’	  length	  of	  stay	  and	  its	  range	  in	  node	  
P	  is	  much	  shorter	  than	  that	  of	  other	  nodes,	  and	  as	  a	  result,	  98%	  of	  all	  visitors	  to	  
node	  P	  have	  a	  length	  of	  stay	  between	  19	  seconds	  and	  113	  second.	  
	  
Conversely,	   Figure	   4	   (b)	   shows	   the	   comparative	   “visitor	   survival	   curve”.	   We	   plot	  
the	   percentage	   of	   visitors	   at	   given	   times.	   This	   plot	   is	   frequently	   used	   in	   visitor	  
studies	   in	   order	   to	   analyze	   the	   length	   of	   stay,	   when	   half	   of	   the	   visitors	   leave,	   an	  
exhibit	  or	  room	  (Bicknell,	  1995).	  We	  can	  observe	  that	  the	  length	  of	  stay	  is	  largely	  
varied	  among	  nodes:	  00:20-­‐00:30	  for	  node	  D,	  01:30-­‐01:40	  for	  node	  V,	  01:30-­‐01:40	  

	  

6	  

for	  node	  C,	  00:00-­‐	  00:10	  for	  node	  P,	  02:10-­‐02:20	  for	  node	  B,	  and	  00:00-­‐00:10	  for	  
node	   G.	   However,	   most	   of	   the	   nodes	   experience	   a	   length	   of	   stay	   within	   a	   few	  
minutes.	  Again,	  we	  can	  observe	  that	  two	  kinds	  of	  nodes	  exist,	  which	  we	  can	  classify	  
as	  shorter	  and	  longer	  stay	  type	  nodes.	  Within	  the	  former	  group,	  half	  of	  visitors	  left	  
the	  node	  by	  10-­‐20	  seconds	  in	  the	  cases	  of	  nodes	  G	  and	  P.	  In	  the	  case	  of	  the	  node	  D,	  
this	  duration	  is	  little	  bit	  longer,	  but	  half	  of	  visitors	  stayed	  for	  just	  20-­‐30	  seconds.	  
	  
Relationship	  between	  visitors’	  length	  of	  stay	  and	  density	  
	  
The	   perspective	   on	   length	   of	   stay,	   however,	   greatly	   changes	   when	   examining	  
visitors’	   duration	   of	   stay	   in	   relationship	   to	   the	   degree	   of	   the	   occupancy	   of	   each	  
node.	  Figure	  5	  shows	  the	  relationship	  between	  each	  node’s	  occupancy	  normalized	  
by	  the	  maximum	  number	  of	  visitors	  in	  the	  area	  (x-­‐axis)	  and	  the	  average	  duration	  
of	  stay	  expressed	  by	  seconds	  (y-­‐axis).	  As	  we	  can	  see,	  a	  clear	  tendency	  exists	  among	  
all	  data.	  The	  average	  duration	  of	  stay	  first	  goes	  up	  with	  the	  room	  occupancy	  from	  
point	   W	   to	   point	   X,	   then	   stays	   around	   the	   maximum	   on	   some	   occupancy	   level	  
interval	  (point	  X	  to	  Z).	  After	  that,	  length	  of	  stay	  drops	  down	  as	  the	  occupancy	  level	  
starts	  to	  exceed	  a	  certain	  threshold	  (point	  Z).	  
	  

	  

Figure	  5.	  Distribution	  of	  the	  normalized	  occupancy	  vs	  the	  length	  of	  stay.	  

	  

Table	  1.	  The	  threshold	  of	  the	  normalized	  occupancy	  in	  each	  node.	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Point	  X	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Point	  Y	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Point	  Z	  
Node	  D	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  183sec	  (0.235)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  204sec	  (0.498)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  188sec	  (0.636)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Node	  V	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  289sec	  (0.235)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  315sec	  (0.368)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  271sec	  (0.781)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Node	  C	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  225sec	  (0.221)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  249sec	  (0.352)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  187sec	  (0.753)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Node	  P	  

	  

7	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  94sec	  (0.214)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  118sec	  (0.5)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  79sec	  (0.764)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Node	  B	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  353sec	  (0.238)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  375sec	  (0.504)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  293sec	  (0.772)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Node	  G	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  167sec	  (0.267)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  208sec	  (0.351)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  145sec	  (0.657)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  
The	  length	  of	  stay	  for	  point	  W	  is	  extremely	  short	  because	  it	  contains	  visitors,	  who	  
just	   pass	   by	   the	   area	   rather	   than	   stay	   there,	   which	   we	   demonstrated	   in	   the	  
previous	   sections.	   When	   the	   occupancy	   level	   increases	   from	   point	   W	   to	   X,	   the	  
number	   of	   visitors	   who	   tend	   to	   stay	   longer	   also	   increases.	   Point	   X	   can	   be	  
considered	  the	  equilibrium	  between	  an	  ideal	  length	  of	  stay	  for	  a	  visitor	  when	  he	  or	  
she	   is	   free	   to	   stay	   as	   long	   as	   he	   or	   she	   wants.	   This	   is	   because	   visitors	   are	   free	   to	  
look	  at	  the	  artwork	  between	  point	  W	  and	  X	  without	  any	  obstacles	  due	  to	  the	  low	  
density	   of	   other	   visitors.	   Conversely,	   from	   point	   X	   onward,	   the	   average	   length	   of	  
stay	   remains	   almost	   flat	   until	   point	   Z,	   at	   which	   point	   visitors’	   length	   of	   stay	  
drastically	  starts	  to	  decrease.	  We	  speculate	  that	  this	  is	  because	  the	  exceeding	  high-­‐
density	   of	   other	   visitors	   may	   affect	   a	   visitor’s	   comfort,	   resulting	   in	   a	   desire	   to	  
escape	  the	  crowd.	  
	  
The	   length	   of	   stay	   at	   point	   X	   is	   largely	   varied	   depending	   on	   the	   node.	   Node	   B	   at	  
point	   X	   shows	   the	   longest	   length	   of	   stay	   (353	   seconds)	   with	   a	   0.238	   normalized	  
occupancy	  level	  among	  the	  other	  nodes.	  Then,	  node	  B	  remains	  a	  flat	  until	  point	  Z.	  
Conversely,	  node	  P	  at	  point	  X	  represents	  the	  shortest	  length	  of	  stay	  (94	  seconds)	  
with	   a	   0.214	   normalized	   occupancy	   level	   among	   the	   other	   nodes.	   Although	   the	  
occupancy	  level	  is	  similar	  between	  those	  two	  nodes,	  the	  former’s	  length	  of	  stay	  is	  
almost	   four	   times	   longer	   than	   the	   latter’s.	   However,	   the	   normalized	   occupancy	  
level	   of	   point	   X	   for	   node	   B	   is	   higher	   than	   that	   of	   node	   P	   (i.e.,	   0.238	   vs.	   0.214,	  
respectively).	   Additionally,	   these	   nodes	   correspond	   with	   the	   maximum	   and	  
minimum	  lengths	  of	  stay	  at	  point	  X,	  although	  the	  occupancy	  level	  of	  both	  nodes	  is	  
quite	   similar:	   both	   of	   them	   are	   around	   0.50.	   Furthermore,	   the	   length	   of	   stay	   at	  
node	  P	  starts	  to	  decrease	  earlier	  than	  that	  of	  node	  B.	  	  
	  
Regarding	  the	  relationship	  between	  node	  V	  and	  node	  B,	  although	  point	  X	  for	  both	  
of	   them	   shows	   a	   similar	   length	   of	   stay	   (i.e.,	   0.235	   vs.	   0.238,	   respectively),	   the	  
maximum	  length	  of	  stay	  of	  node	  V	  has	  a	  much	  lower	  occupation	  level	  than	  those	  of	  
nodes	  P	  and	  B	  (i.e.,	  0.368	  for	  node	  V).	  Additionally,	  node	  V	  has	  the	  highest	  density	  
for	   point	   Z	   (0.781)	   with	   the	   second	   longest	   length	   of	   stay	   (271sec),	   whereas	   the	  
longest	  length	  of	  stay	  is	  at	  node	  B	  (293seconds).	  
	  
All	   of	   these	   facts	   indicate	   that	   the	   artworks	   at	   node	   B	   attract	   and	   hold	   visitors	  
much	  more	  strongly	  than	  the	  artworks	  of	  node	  V	  and	  P.	  Node	  B	  seems	  to	  inspire	  
visitors	   to	   stay	   longer,	   even	   with	   higher	   occupation	   density,	   while	   node	   V	   and	   P	  
seem	   to	   cause	   visitors	   to	   stay	   for	   shorter	   durations	   when	   experiencing	   the	   same	  
density.	   Also,	   the	   data	   shows	   that	   the	   average	   length	   of	   stay	   of	   a	   visitor	   and	   the	  
occupation	   level	   of	   a	   node	   form	   a	   clear	   pattern.	   The	   crowd	   density	   around	   the	  
artwork	   largely	   affects	   a	   visitor’s	   length	   of	   stay	   either	   positively	   or	   negatively,	   and	  
the	  type	  of	  effect	  is	  largely	  dependent	  on	  the	  node.	  
	  

	  

8	  

We	  speculate	  that,	  although	  it	  also	  depends	  on	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  galleries	  and	  the	  
type	  of	  visitors,	  up	  to	  certain	  occupancy	  limits	  visitors	  are	  actually	  attracted	  by	  the	  
crowd:	  however,	  once	  the	  crowd’s	  size	  reaches	  a	  certain	  level,	  visitors	  will	  try	  to	  
avoid	  the	  node.	  This	  indicates	  that	  we	  may	  use	  point	  Z	  as	  a	  threshold	  to	  distinguish	  
visitors’	   level	   of	   comfort,	   which	   enables	   us	   to	   manage	   the	   environment	   in	   order	   to	  
avoid	  exceeding	  this	  density	  threshold	  in	  the	  environment.	  Also,	  we	  may	  consider	  
some	   characteristic	   points	   such	   as	   point	   X	   and	   Y	   to	   enabling	   to	   manage	   different	  
types	  of	  environments/crowds	  inside	  the	  galleries.	  
	  
Conclusions	  and	  discussion	  
	  
The	   limitation	   of	   our	   proposed	   method	   is	   as	   follows:	   first,	   the	   sensor	   can	   detect	  
only	  mobile	  devices	  in	  which	  the	  Bluetooth	  function	  is	  activated.	  This	  indicates	  the	  
representativeness	   of	   the	   sample	   may	   have	   a	   strong	   bias	   toward	   certain	   groups,	  
such	   as	   the	   upper	   class,	   higher-­‐educated	   people,	   and	   the	   younger	   generation	  
rather	   than	   seniors	   and	   children.	   Moreover,	   sensors	   are	   not	   capable	   of	  
distinguishing	   individual	   visit	   or	   group	   visits.	   The	   representativeness	   of	   our	  
sample	   can	   be	   calculated	   by	   comparing	   the	   sample	   obtained	   from	   Bluetooth	  
detection	   and	   the	   head	   count	   by	   hand	   over	   a	   shorter	   period	   (e.g,	   a	   few	   hours	   or	  
few	   days).	   In	   fact	   we	   applied	   a	   systematic	   comparison	   over	   a	   longer	   period	   (one	  
month)	   with	   the	   number	   of	   ticket	   sales	   in	   the	   desk	   where	   a	   Bluetooth	   sensor	   is	  
installed.	  Second,	  the	  sensor	  enables	  us	  to	  detect	  visitors’	  presence	  in	  the	  specific	  
area,	  which	  is	  determined	  by	  the	  radius	  of	  each	  sensor’s	  detection	  range,	  but	  such	  
sensors	   cannot	   specify	   whether	   visitors	   are	   actually	   looking	   at	   the	   artwork	   or	   if	  
they	   are	   simply	   in	   the	   area.	   This	   shortcoming	   is	   strongly	   related	   to	   the	   following	  
limitation:	  “while	  time	  is	  a	  necessary	  condition	  for	  learning,	  time	  in	  a	  gallery	  does	  
not	   correspond	   directly	   to	   time	   spent	   attending	   to	   exhibitions”	   [14].	   Third,	  
Bluetooth	   detection	   techniques	   cannot	   disclose	   the	   visitors’	   motivations	   and	   inner	  
thoughts	  in	  any	  way:	  this	  method	  merely	  identifies	  their	  presence	  and	  the	  precise	  
length	  of	  their	  stay.	  Finally,	  sensors	  are	  not	  capable	  to	  collect	  socio-­‐demographics	  
(i.e.,	  origin,	  age,	  gender,	  profession)	  as	  for	  other	  traditional	  behavioral	  variables.	  
	  
As	   a	   backdrop	   to	   this	   situation,	   the	   proposed	   new	   approach	   enables	   us	   to	   shed	  
light	  on	  some	  unknown	  aspects	  of	  visitors’	  behavior.	  Our	  proposed	  system	  and	  the	  
results	   we	   obtained	   through	   an	   adequate	   statistical	   analysis	   can	   work	   as	   a	   new	  
tool	   for	   the	   museum	   management.	   Our	   system	   effectively	   captures	   an	   individual	  
visitor’s	  length	  of	  stay	  in	  different	  ways	  and	  enables	  us	  to	  store	  this	  information	  as	  
a	  large-­‐scale	  dataset.	  Such	  a	  method	  appears	  to	  be	  particularly	  useful	  for	  medium	  
or	  small	  size	  museums	  where	  it	  could	  be	  possible	  to	  install	  a	  complete	  system	  of	  
sensors.	   This	   method	   results	   in	   a	   dataset	   that	   is	   very	   different	   from	   the	  
conventional	  dataset	  in	  two	  ways:	  the	  quantitative	  size	  of	  the	  dataset	  and	  the	  finer-­‐
grain	  detection	  of	  visitor	  behavior	  both	  spatially	  and	  temporally.	  
	  
All	  of	  our	  findings	  are	  helpful	  for	  the	  management	  of	  visitor	  flow	  in	  order	  to	  reduce	  
congestion	  at	  specific	  areas	  and	  around	  specific	  pieces	  of	  artwork.	  It	  is	  also	  useful	  
in	  order	  to	  bring	  to	  light	  less	  visited	  or	  less	  “attractive”	  artworks/rooms	  inside	  the	  
museum,	  in	  order	  to	  propose	  interpretation	  tools	  and/	  or	  walking	  tours	  capable	  to	  
increase	   the	   value	   of	   such	   “neglected”	   spaces.	   Additionally,	   our	   data	   suggest	   that	  
visitor	   behavior	   is	   based	   on	   some	   patterns,	   which	   make	   it	   possible	   to	   foresee	   their	  

	  

9	  

future	   movement	   in	   a	   dynamic	   way.	   Also,	   these	   data	   are	   significantly	   useful	   for	  
designing	  the	  spatial	  arrangement	  (e.g.,	  changes	  in	  the	  layout	  of	  exhibits,	  facilities	  
and	  advertisements),	  depending	  on	  visitor	  activities	  and	  use	  of	  space.	  Finally,	  our	  
findings	   indicate	   that	   efficient	   and	   effective	   congestion	   management	   of	   the	  
museum	   can	   be	   realized	   by	   limiting	   the	   number	   of	   visitors	   that	   are	   able	   to	   enter	  
based	  on	  the	  time	  of	  the	  day.	  
	  
References	  
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
	  
	  

14.

Yalowitz, S. S. & Bronnenkant, Kerry. (2009) ”Timing and Tracking: Unlocking Visitor
Behavior” Visitor Studies 12(1): 47-64.
Shoval N, McKercher B, Birenboim A, Ng E, 2013, “The application of a sequence alignment
method to the creation of typologies of tourist activity in time and space” Environment and
Planning B: Planning and Design advance online publication, doi:10.1068/b38065
González M C, Hidalgo C A, Barabási A L, 2008, “Understanding individual human mobility
patterns” Nature 453 779-782
Ratti C, Pulselli R, Williams S, Frenchman D, 2006, “Mobile Landscapes: using location data
from cell phones for urban analysis” Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 33(5)
727-748
Kanda T, Shiomi M, Perrin L, Nomura T, Ishiguro H, Hagita N, 2007, “Analysis of people
trajectories with ubiquitous sensors in a science museum” Proceedings 2007 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA’07) 4846-4853
Tröndle, M, Greenwood, S, Kirchberg, V, Tschacher, W, 2014, “An Integrative and
Comprehensive Methodology for Studying Aesthetic Experience in the Field: Merging
Movement Tracking, Physiology, and Psychological Data“, Environment and Behavior, 46 (1)
pp102-135.
Yoshimura Y, Sobolevsky S, Ratti C, Girardin F, Carrascal J P, Blat J, Sinatra R, 2014, “An
analysis of visitors’ behaviour in The Louvre Museum: a study using Bluetooth data”
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 41 (6) 1113-1131
Kostakos V, O'Neill E, Penn A, Roussos G, Papadongonas D, 2010, “Brief encounters: sensing,
modelling and visualizing urban mobility and copresence networks” ACM Transactions on
Computer Human Interaction 17(1) 1-38
Versichele M, Neutens T, Delafontaine M, Van de Weghe N, 2011, “The use of Bluetooth for
analysing spatiotemporal dynamics of human movement at mass events: a case study of the
Ghent festivities” Applied Geography 32 208-220
Delafontaine M, Versichele M, Neutens T, Van de Weghe N, 2012, “Analysing spatiotemporal
sequences in Bluetooth tracking data” Applied Geography 34 659-668
Mayer-Schönberger V, Cukier K, 2013, Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We
Live, Work and Think (John Murray, London)
Barceló J, Montero L, Marqués L, Carmona C, 2010, “Travel Time Forecasting and Dynamic
Origin-Destination Estimation for Freeways Based on Bluetooth Traffic Monitoring”
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2175: 19-27
Stallings W, 2011, Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 5th Edition
(Prentice Hall, Boston MA)
Hein G, 1998, Learning in the Museum (Routledge, London)

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

10	  

