Impact of National Aquarium in Baltimore
on Visitors’ Conservation Attitudes,
Behavior, and Knowledge
“

*

b

i

b

LESLIE
M. ADELMAN,
JOHNH. FALK,AND SYLVIA
JAMES

ABSTRACT

This study at the National Aquarium in Baltimore (NAIB) was conducted to
assess four key aspects of the visitor experience: (1) incoming conservation
knowledge, attitudes, and behavior of NAIB visitors; (2) patterns of use and
interaction with exhibition components throughout the NAIB; (3) exiting conservation knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of visitors; and (4) over time, how
the NAIB experience altered or affected individuals’ conservation knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors.
Three hundred six visitors participated in the study, which was conducted from
March through July, 1999. The study utilized four data-collection techniques:
(1) face-to-face interviews, (2) Personal Meaning Mapping (PMM), (3) tracking,
and (4) follow-up telephone interviews. Participants were a self-selected population and were generally more knowledgeable about, more concerned about,
and more involved in conservation-related issues than the general public. However, they were far from conservationists. Visitors in this study clearly absorbed
the fundamental conservation message at the NAIB. In fact, the NAIB visit
appeared to focus visitors’ conservation-related thoughts, while also broadening their understanding of conservation.
Changes in visitors’ conservation knowledge, understanding, and interests by
and large persisted over six to eight weeks after visiting NAIB. The NAIB experience also connected to visitors’ lives in a variety of ways following their visit.
However, these personal experiences rarely resulted in new conservation actions.
In fact, their enthusiasm and emotional commitment to conservation (inspired
during the NAIB visit) generally fell back to original levels, presumably in the
absence of reinforcing experiences. The findings of this study are guiding subsequent investigations at the NAIB. More generally, the results suggest strategies to enhance current understanding of the impact free-choice learning
institutions have on their visiting public.

Leslie Adelman is a senior research associate and John Falk is the director at the Institute
for Learning Innovation, 166 West Street, Annapolis, MD 21401, <falk@ilinet.org>,
<adelman@ilinet.org>, and Sylvia James is director of Conservation Education,
National Aquarium in Baltimore, Pier 31501 East Pratt Street, Baltimore, M D 21202,
<sjames@aqua.org>.
33

34

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

CURATOR 43/1

~

JANUARY 2000

35

INTRODUCTION

In 1998, the Institute for Learning Innovation was asked to help the National
Aquarium in Baltimore (NAIB) assess the impact they have on their visiting public. Determining institutional impact is arguably at once the most important evaluative question to ask and the most challenging to answer. What does it mean to have
an impact on visitors? How should an institution determine what impact it wishes
to have on visitors? What are appropriate metrics for measuring impact, and over
what time frame?
The Institute for Learning Innovation (Institute) has been deeply involved in
several efforts of this kind over the past years and has been attempting to develop
strategies for thinking about and answering this complex evaluation question (cf. Falk
et al. 2001). Our approach to assessing impact is grounded upon fundamental assumptions about the nature of museum experiences in general, and how people learn
in free-choice learning settings in particular. We believe that people utilize aquariums, zoos, museums, and other free-choice learning experiences for many reasons
(Falk 1998; Falk and Dierking 2000; Falk et al. 1998). For example, adults go to an
aquarium to see new and interesting things and to learn more about the aquatic
world. Children, too, are looking for new and interesting things to see and do. All
visitors go to aquariums with a desire to satisfy their curiosity and fulfill their needs
for fun and intellectual stimulation. Similar motivations are at work when individuals
choose to watch an educational television show or seek information on the Internet
(Chadwick 1998; Chadwick et al. 2000; Eveland and Dunwoody 1997; Gross 1997),
or participate as part of a community group (Brice Heath and Smyth 1999). Rarely
do people enter free-choice learning situations with a desire to become an expert
in the subject, or with an explicit agenda to affect more active behaviors. The common
denominator is the need to satisfy a personal sense of identity, to create a sense of
value within the world, and a desire to fulfill personal needs (Falk and Dierking 2000).
All of these relate to the impact an institution can and does have on visitors. Hence,
visitors to an aquarium like the NAIB build on prior knowledge, experience, and
beliefs, and in the process construct meaning from their experience. The question
becomes, how do individuals personally relate and connect experiences in an exhibition or program to their prior understandings and beliefs?
Equally important, learning needs to be understood within the context of a
visitor’s entire life. Any information an individual might gain from exposure to NAIB
exhibitions and programs needs to be understood within the context of a larger
informational sphere. No matter how successful exhibitions and programs may be,
visitors, like all people, construct their understanding of the world, not from a single
experience or source, but from a variety of sources over long periods of time (Anderson 1999; Anderson et al. 2000; Crane 1994; Falk and Dierking 2000; Gambone
and Arbreton 1997; Medrich 1991). Any effort we would make to understand the

36

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

impact of an institution like the NAIB on the public would need to be framed within
the broader context of each individual visitor’s lifelong learning experiences-what
were the individual’s knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors before their NAIB experience? What influence did the NAIB have on these knowledge, attitudes, and
behaviors? And how did specific experiences/exhibitions/programs at NAIB impact
these knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors, both in the short term and over time?
Thus, with these perspectives in mind, we began to look at the specific outcomes
the NAIB wished to create as part of their visitor experience and to the set of
measures we would utilize to assess the presence and extent of those outcomes.

Background and Context-In the past 15 years, the NAIB has served millions of
visitors. The institution’s mission t o stimulate interest in, develop knowledge about,
and inspire stewardship of aquatic environments has directed the design philosophy
of the building, exhibits, and programming. Within this conservation framework, the
NAIB seeks to educate the general public and ultimately to change behaviors so that
human pressures on the environment are lessened. To investigate the overall impact
of a visit, the NAIB defined the following goals: (1) Determine what visitors already
know about conservation that is related to topics addressed by NAIB exhibits; (2)
Determine what behaviors visitors already engage in that are related to conservation action; ( 3 ) Determine what knowledge visitors already have about local conservation issues, specifically those related to the Chesapeake Bay and its surrounding
watershed; (4) Determine which component(s) of the visit were most effective in
motivating visitors to engage in conservation action; and (5) Determine the impact
of the NAIB visit on the level of visitor’s conservation knowledge, as related to topics
stressed in NAIB exhibits.

Research Approach and Design-Although NAIB was interested in effectively determining the impact of an aquarium visit relative to their conservation mission, they
recognized that a crucial first step was a baseline phase to try to understand visitors’ complex motivations and experiences. Previous work in the field and at other
similar institutions provided initial guidance for talking to visitors about their attitudes, interests, and conservation knowledge. This phase of the study was undertaken
without any presumption that NAIB already understood the language visitors used
to express their thoughts, opinions and ideas about conservation, how they conceptualized and related to conservation issues, or what experiences they brought with
them that shaped their expectations and overall experience at the aquarium. This
baseline exploratory effort would guide and inform future research at the NAIB.

CURATOR 4311

JANUARY 2000

37

METHODS

The data for this study were collected using four overlapping data collection
approaches (Figure 2). To reduce bias, multiple methods were utilized so that
results could be triangulated across several methods. The four data collection
approaches were: face-to-face interviews, Personal Meaning Mapping (PMM), tracking, and follow-up telephone interviews. Researchers collected data at NAIB from
March through May 1993, while telephone interviews were conducted from May to
early July 1999. A total of 306 visitors completed interviews or PMMs. (Tracking
methods and results are not presented in this article.)

Face-to-Face Interviews-To assess visitors’ incoming conservation knowledge, attitudes, and concerns, as well as their conceptual understanding of key conservation
messages in the aquarium, semi-structured interviews were conducted with a random sample of visitors (n= 100) both before (entry interviews) and after (exit interviews) their NAIB experience. Every effort was made to conduct these interviews
as conversations, rather than interrogations.
Entry Interviews. Data collectors randomly selected entering adult visitors (single
adults, adults with children, and adults accompanied by other adults) to interview.
The entry interview focused on issues, including visitors’ awareness and understanding
of conservation as a concept; their conservation-related knowledge, concerns, and
behaviors; perceptions of their relationship to conservation issues; and their Chesapeake Bay-related knowledge. Entry interview data established “baseline” information, which could then be compared to visitor’s experiences, understanding, and
attitudes after their visit. In addition, visitors were asked several questions drawn
from two national telephone surveys about conservation-related issues in order to
determine how NAIB visitors compared to a national sample (Anon. 1996; NEETF
1997). Entry interviews typically lasted fifteen to twenty minutes. As part of the
interview, visitors were also asked their education level, residence, and membership
status at NAIB and in other nature organizations. Researchers also recorded visitors’ gender, social group composition, approximate age, and race/ethnicity through
visual assessment.
Exit Interviews. Following the entry interview, visitors were informed that the
data collector would appreciate the opportunity to talk with them again after their
experience in NAIB. The exit interview focused on issues, including visitors’ sense
of the aquarium’s overall message, what visitors associated with conservation at the
NAIB, and a sense of visitors’ motivation for getting involved in conservation issues.
Exit interviews typically lasted five to ten minutes. In addition to the matched
entry/exit interviews, 103 additional randomly selected visitors were interviewed as
they exited the NAIB. These visitors served as a control group (no pre-intervention).
They were asked the exact same set of exit-interview questions presented to visitors

n=103

Pre-Visit

Objective 1.
Determine the
incoming
conservation
knowledge,
attitudes and
behavior of NAlB
visitors

Figure 2. Research and design.

Objective 3:
Determine exiting
conservation
knowledge,
attitudes and
behabior of NAlB
visitors

NAlB Visit

I1
(same as
pre-visit)

CONTROL GROUP
(no pre-intervention)

(same as
n=lOO
pre-visit)

Interviews

Post-Visit

PROPOSED FULL STUDY

Objective 2.
Determine visitors'
patterns of use and
quality of
interaction with
components

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES

Telephone
Interviews
n=48
subsample

6-8 weeks
after visit

how the NAlB
experience alters or
affects individuals'
conservation

Objective 3'

9

Q

0

w

CURATOR 4311

JANUARY 2000

39

participating in the paired entry and exit interviews, as well as the visitor background
questions posed in the entry interview.
All interview data were categorized and coded, with an inter-rater reliability
of 93%. Data were analyzed with the statistical software programs Survey Pro and
SPSS, using Chi-squared and cross-tabulation analysis to compare changes in the
distribution of qualitative responses and t-tests for comparison of quantitative means.

Personal Meaning Maps-Institute
researchers also utilized a relatively new
methodology called Personal Meaning Mapping (cf. Falk et al. 1998) to assess
visitors’ conservation knowledge and attitudes before and after their NAIB visit.
Personal Meaning Mapping (PMM) is designed to quantifiably measure how an
educational experience, such as visiting the NAIB, uniquely affects each individual’s
personal conceptual, attitudinal, and emotional understanding.
For each individual, a personal meaning map was developed from four semiindependent parameters. The first parameter of PMM focused on an individual’s
vocabulary. More specifically, this parameter attempted to document the extent of
a person’s awareness and understanding of conservation by looking at the vocabulary used to discuss this concept. The second parameter looked at the breadth of
understanding: How widely does the respondent understand conservation as a concept? How many different ways does this individual approach this concept? The third
parameter investigated the depth of a person’s understanding: how deeply and richly
someone understands the particular concept. The fourth parameter looked at the
emotional intensity associated with and underlying the visitor’s understanding of
conservation.
An additional 103 adults were randomly selected and administered a PMM as
they entered the NAIB. These visitors were asked to share any thoughts about the
word prompt conservation. Upon exiting the NAIB, these visitors were asked if they
would add to, subtract from, or modify any thoughts that they had shared previously
regarding conservation. The purpose of doing pre- and post-PMMs with this sample
of visitors was to determine the extent of change of visitors’ incoming and exiting
knowledge, interests, and attitudes related to conservation. Pre-visit maps established
“baseline” information, which could then be compared to visitors’ experiences, understanding, and attitudes after their visit. As part of the PMM, visitors were also
asked their education level, residence, and membership at NAIB and in nature
organizations. Researchers also recorded visitors’ gender, social group composition,
approximate age, and raceiethnicity through visual assessment.
PMM data were categorized and coded within the framework described above,
with an inter-rater reliability of 90%. Data were analyzed with the statistical software program SPSS, using t-tests to compare quantitative means over time.

40

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

Telephone Interviews-Our understanding of the nature of learning includes a keen
appreciation for the need to extend the time line for assessing learning (cf. Falk, 1998a;
Falk and Dierking, 2000). Much of what an individual learns in a museum, aquarium,
or zoo might only become apparent weeks, months, or even years after the
experience, and then only in relation to the individual’s personal construction of
knowledge.
Visitors who participated in entry and exit interviews, exit-only interviews, and
Personal Meaning Mapping were asked if they would be willing to participate in a
follow-up telephone interview approximately six to eight weeks after their visit to
NAIB. Forty-eight visitors were interviewed by telephone between May and early July
1999. Follow-up telephone interviews typically lasted between ten and fifteen minutes and closely paralleled the approach and content of the exit interviews (n=33)
or Personal Meaning Mapping ( n = 15) described above.

RESULTS

Sample Characteristics-Sample characteristics were generally consistent between
sub-samples and therefore are reported here in aggregate. Most of the interviews
were conducted o n weekdays (94%, n=285). Most of the visitors interviewed were

Figure 3. A young visitor greets a dolphin as its trainedkeeper watches. Photo by Richard
Nowitz.

CURATOR 4311

JANUARY 2000

41

visiting the NAIB when it was moderately crowded (55%, n = 167) or crowded (42%,
n = 127); only 3% of visitors interviewed (n=9) experienced a nearly empty aquarium.
Men and women were represented in equal proportions in the sample.
Interviewees’ ages were uniformly distributed, ranging from 20 to over 60 years old.
Visitors in the sample were primarily Caucasian, with a small representation of African
Americans, Latinos, and Asians. The majority of visitors in the sample had at least
a college degree; another 25% had received a high school diploma. The majority of
visitors interviewed were visiting the NAIB with other adults, while one out of every four visitors attended with their families. Most were visiting in small groups of
two to three people. Specifically, 60% of the adults (n= 137) were visiting in groups
consisting of two people, 20% (n=46) in groups of three, and 15% (n=34) in groups
of four to six people. About one out of every three visitors interviewed was from the
local area (which includes Baltimore, Washington, DC, northern Virginia, Maryland,
and southern Pennsylvania). The majority were from other areas throughout the
United States.
Most visitors in the sample were not members of the NAIB and were first-time
visitors. Of those visitors who had been to the NAIB before, most (83%) had not
visited in the last twelve months; 11% (n=28) had previously visited once; 1% (n=3)
had previously visited twice; 1% (n=3) had previously visited three times; and 3 %
(n=9) had visited the NAIB more than four times in the last twelve months. Most
of the visitors interviewed reported they were not members of a nature or conservation organization. Of those who were members, the most commonly mentioned
nature or conservation organizations included zoos or natural history museums in
their areas (29%, n=59), the World Wildlife Fund (24%, n=49), the Nature Conservancy (20%, n=41), the Sierra Club (18%, n=36), and the National Audubon
Society (16%, n=32).
Visitors gave multiple reasons for visiting NAIB.’.?The majority of the visitors
interviewed gave reasons related to a sense of place (61%, n=61), including: they
like aquaria, the NAIB has a strong reputation, and because friends o r family had
recommended it as an important or interesting thing to d o when in Baltimore. Onethird of the visitors (33%, n=33) came to the NAIB for educational reasons. These
visitors mentioned wanting to see fish or wildlife, or specifically mentioned that they
wanted to “learn something. They often described their visit as connected to their
personal interests and hobbies. This group of visitors, particularly those who were
part of family groups, also tended to mention how important it was for kids to see
things they have not seen before and be exposed to new experiences.
Another third (29%, n=29) of the visitors cited practical reasons for visiting,
such as “I am in town for a convention,” or “I am going to a ball game later so I have
some time to kill.” Nearly a third of the visitors (29%, n=29) also said that social
considerations, such as family o r friends, strongly motivated their NAIB visit. This
group included individuals who said they had been taken to the aquarium when they
”

ADELMAN ET AL.

42

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM I N BALTIMORE

were younger so now they were taking their children. Less than one in ten (8%, n=8)
said they came to the NAIB specifically for entertainment. These visitors mentioned
that they “came to look around” or “havefun.”

Incoming visitor conservation knowledge, attitudes, concerns, and behaviors-It is
essential to understand what conservation-related knowledge, attitudes, and experiences visitors bring with them when visiting the NAIB in order to understand relative
change and impacts. However, because the emphasis here is on outcomes and impacts, the findings regarding visitors’ knowledge, attitudes, and experiences upon
entering the NAIB are only summarized.
Entering visitors easily identified conservation as a term (98%, n=98) and a
concept, and shared multiple thoughts when asked what conservation meant to them.
The vast majority of visitors perceived conservation as re sewing" the environment
or nature (79%, n=79). Visitors also frequently mentioned “saving”and “protecting”
and appeared to use all of these words interchangeably to denote that they thought
of conservation as positive action; something that can be done. A few visitors also
discussed conservation in terms of a delicate balance in nature and the need to
maintain that balance for the future (4%, n=4). These visitors mentioned the importance of humans and animals being able to co-exist together in nature.
When talking about conservation, the majority of visitors readily mentioned
things that they felt were being threatened (63%, n=63), emphasizing natural resources, land, wildlife, and animals, while others focused on things that can be done
or are being done to help protect the environment (280/0, n=28), such as “not polluting, “stop cutting down, “clean, and “take care of our animals. The vast majority of visitors talked about action at the level of community and society, rather than
the individual.
NAIB visitors were more knowledgeable than the public nationally about
sources of pollution and oil in aquatic habitats. Significantly more ( x =~ 10.27, p<O.Ol)
NAIB visitors (49%, n=49) than respondents in a national telephone survey (22%)
correctly believed that run-off was the main form of pollution in rivers and streams.
Similarly, significantly more (x‘ = 5.80, p<0.025) NAIB visitors (36%, n=33) than
respondents in a national telephone survey (16%) correctly believed that discarded
motor oil was t h e main source of oil in rivers, lakes, and bays.
Although visitors were generally more knowledgeable about conservation-related issues than were national survey respondents, they had only a marginal understanding of Chesapeake Bay-related environmental issues. Less than half of the
visitors acknowledged and were capable of discussing some Chesapeake Bay issues
(49%, n=49). The issues with which they were familiar included decreasing animal
populations (2.596, n=25), such as oysters and crabs, and general pollution (20’36,
n=20). The local area residents (Maryland, northern Virginia, southern Pennsylvania, Washington, DC) demonstrated greater awareness and concern for Chesapeake
”

”

”

”

CURATOR 4311

JANUARY 2000

43

Bay issues than did nonlocals; local residents’ awareness and concerns were typically
highly connected to personal experience.
Visitors also expressed a strong belief in the negative impact people are having on the world around them, both locally and globally. Nearly all of the visitors
readily perceived connections between conservation issues and their everyday lives
(96%, n=96) and most of these visitors readily articulated their thoughts with specific detail (92%, n=88).
Of the visitors who perceived a connection and elaborated on their thoughts,
the majority emphasized the power and importance of personal choice (89%, n=78)
as the major connection between people’s daily lives and conservation issues. These
visitors recognized themselves and others in society as “choice-makers”and the choices
that people make directly impact the environment, including controlling waste and
pollution (26%, n=20), use of natural resources (18%, n=14), as consumers (9%,
n=7) and as voting citizens (8%, n=6). In addition, more than half of the visitors
who perceived a connection and elaborated on their thoughts believed humans have
an important role as caretakers and stewards of the environment (59%, n=52).
The language visitors used, and the personal references they made when talking
about conservation, were indicators of personal connections visitors had with this
topic. Nearly half of the visitors (43%, n=43) offered personal information about
themselves and their feelings and shared life experiences and personal judgments.
Consistent with this caring and responsible attitude toward the environment,
the vast majority of visitors were fairly concerned about a variety of conservation issues
(88%, n=88). Of those concerned visitors most could elaborate on their concerns,
providing some specific detail (88%. n=77). Visitors were particularly concerned about
the decline and extinction of plant and animal species (31%, n=24), pollution issues
worldwide (24%, n = IS), the degradation and loss of aquatic and coastal habitats
(24%, n=18), and water quality (22%, n=17). NAIB visitors also consistently rated
environmental issues as slightly more serious than did respondents in a national
telephone survey, indicating that, even before entering the aquarium, NAIB visitors
were generally more concerned about these issues than the national public. Only
gender and repeat visitation influenced visitors’ rating of the seriousness of environmental issues. Women rated each issue as slightly more serious than men. Similarly,
repeat visitors tended to think of the environmental issues presented as more serious than did first-time visitors.
NAIB visitors also perceived themselves as generally active in conservation
issues. Most visitors (96%, n=96) reported that they had made some lifestyle changes
to positively impact environmental issues. The majority of visitors (73%, n=73)
specifically mentioned recycling or “reusing” as specific examples of lifestyle changes.
Half of the visitors (54%, n=54) mentioned they had made changes to minimize their
use of resources. These visitors recognized that people contribute widely to environmental problems and that wasteful use of resources was a huge problem that they
could try to not make worse through their own actions. Although some visitors only

44

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM I N BALTIMORE

made a general reference to “livinglightly” and “uusingless” (14%, n = 14), many visitors
specifically mentioned minimizing use of fuel (l4%, n = 14), energy (14%, n = 14), and
water (12%, n=12). Another one-quarter of visitors (27%, n=27) mentioned not
polluting and “fukingcure ofgarbage” as changes in lifestyle. Other changes mentioned
related to consumerism (1596, n=1.5), general increased awareness (14%, n=14),
reducing use of pesticides and chemicals (7%, n=7), and composting (596,n=.5). In
addition, NAIB visitors were more frequently engaged than the public nationally in
a variety of conservation actions. Specifically, half of NAIB visitors (5196, n=44)
avoided using chemicals on their lawns and gardens compared to 39% of the national
public. Similarly, 16% of NAIB visitors donated money to environmental organizations ( n = 15) compared to 11% of the general public.

Exiting conservation knowledge, concerns and behaviors-In this section we report
on visitors’ reactions to the NAIB and their understanding of its key messages after their NAIB visit, in both the short and the long term. Of the 203 adults interviewed on site just after visiting the aquarium, 100 had participated in an entry
interview, while 103 were interviewed for the first time. The exit-only interview group
served as a control group to determine if the pre-visit intervention by researchers
affected visitors’ perceptions of key messages. There were n o significant differences
in responses between the entry-and-exit and exit-only interviewed groups
= 7.48,
~ ~ 0 . 0 1hence,
);
both samples were combined and are reported together here, unless otherwise noted.

(xz

Visitors’ perception of the main message of the NAIB-Nearly all of the exiting
visitors reported they perceived a strong main message (93%, n=185; Table I). Nearly
half of them (4396, n=M) perceived that the main message at the aquarium was to
“presenv” the environment or nature in general. Visitors also frequently mentioned
“saving” and ‘protectirig” and appeared to use all of these words interchangeably. Onethird of the exiting visitors (35%, n=70) specifically mentioned that “con.sewufion
was the main message and strongly perceived that conservation was presented
throughout the aquarium in a variety of ways.
Twelve percent (n=23) of the exiting visitors perceived that the NAIB was trying
to foster and nurture a general feeling of respect and appreciation for the environment. Another 7% (n=13) of the exiting visitors mentioned that the main message
at the aquarium was to show the incredible diversity of life on earth, particularly
wildlife from around the world and “jrom our own backyards.’’ In addition, a few
exiting visitors (7%, n = 13) perceived that the main message at the NAIB was primarily educational. These visitors often talked about the important role of the
aquarium in exposing visitors to new and different animals and ideas.

”

I

n.s.

n.s.

21 Yo
3%
21%

7%
4%

Educational

Balance/
interconnectedness

(X2 = 4.5)

( ~ =2 7.0)

**

12%

n.s.

ns.

Respect/
appreciation

1

I

36a/‘

42%

42%

7%

I

n.s.

Diversity of wildlife

43%

6%

7%

Significance

35%

I

Six to eight weeks after visit
(N = 33)

Upon exiting the NAlB
(N = 199)

Conservation

“Preserve” the
environment

No message/unclear

Main message

Table 1. Visitors’ understanding of the main message at the NAlB upon exiting the aquarium and six to eight weeks
following their visit.

46

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

Finally, a few visitors felt that the NAIB was trying to impress upon visitors
the complex interconnectedness of plants and animals in their environment, as well
as the interconnections between people and the environment (4%, n=7). Gender,
age, social group, repeat visitation, crowd conditions, total time in NAIB, or the time
and quality of interaction with specific key exhibit components did not affect visitor responses.
After six to eight weeks, visitors were just as likely to emphasize ‘Ipreserving the
environment” and “conservation, specifically, as the main messages they remembered
throughout the NAIB (Table 1). However, after six to eight weeks, visitors were more
likely to perceive the main message from their aquarium visit to be the diversity of
wildlife (x2=7.0,p<0.05). Visitors were also more likely to perceive the main message from their aquarium visit to be the complex interconnections between animals,
including humans, and their environments, and the importance of maintaining a balance (x2=4.5,p<O.OI). In the words of one woman during the follow-up telephone
interview, “Es, I’m not sure I got it right, right after the visit; our actions have a major effect on the sea, on watel; on life, and natural resources. Like washing my car affects the life cycle in ocean. Humans affect sea life!”
”

Visitors’ perception of a main conservation message-Most visitors not only perceived a strong message presented throughout the aquarium, but also directly or
indirectly identified that message to be a strong conservation message (75%, n = 150).
Even among those who did not directly or indirectly mention a conservation-related
message as the main message at the NAIB, when specifically queried, all agreed that
there was a strong conservation message at the NAIB. Similarly, after six to eight
weeks, most visitors still directly or indirectly remembered a strong conservation
message throughout the aquarium (73%, n=24). These data indicate that, long
after the aquarium experience, visitors continued to perceive the NAIB as imparting a strong conservation message.

Exiting visitors’ concern for conservation issues-Before entering the NAIB, visitors
consistently rated a series of environmental issues as fairly serious and were slightly
more concerned about each issue than the public nationally. Although no one issue
was significantly rated more serious than the others,3 NAIB visitors tended to perceive water quality as the most serious issue, followed by the loss of rainforests and
the rate of land development and nature being lost. Although plants’ and animals’
extinction rates were also perceived as fairly serious by NAIB visitors entering the
aquarium, this concern was ranked as slightly less serious, on average, than overconsumption of resources.
The NAIB visit did not significantly change visitors’ perceptions of the seriousness of these environmental i s s ~ e sConsistent
.~
with entry scores, upon exiting the

C U R A T O R 4311

JANUARY 2000

47

NAIB visitors rated all of these environmental issues as “vey serious. ” However, upon
exiting, visitors tended to perceive the loss of rainforests as the most serious issue,
followed closely by water quality and the rate of land development and nature being lost. Overconsumption and the rate of extinctions were consistently rated as fairly

Figure 4. Visitors at the Exploration Station in the Marine Mammal pavilion.
Photo by George Grall.

48

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARtUM I N BALTIMORE

serious issues, but not as serious as the others. Similarly, after six to eight weeks,
visitors’ perceptions of the seriousness of these environmental issues remained consistently high and were not significantly different than before entering.’ Interestingly,
water quality once again topped visitors’ concern list.

Lifestyle factors visitors were motivated to change related to conservation issuesFollowing their NAIB visit, visitors were also asked to share their thoughts about
things they could do to help with environmental problems. Visitors continued to
perceive themselves as fairly active in conservation issucs. However, relative to visitors’
incoming perception of their involvement in conservation issues, visitors consistently
reported they wanted to become even more aware and informed about issues in their
everyday lives and worldwide (x2=11.07,p<O.OI). After six to eight weeks, when asked
about lifestyle changes they had made since their NAIB visit (n=33), nearly half
reported they had not changed anything because they were already active (42%,
n = 14). However, of those visitors who reported that they had made lifestyle changes
( n = 19), they most commonly mentioned respecting land and animals more (3796,
n=7) and being more informed and aware of issues (26%, n=5), but did not elaborate
in much detail about how those ideas actually translated into daily behavior.

How the NAIB experience alters or affects individuals’ conservation knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors over time-Much of what an individual learns in a museum,
aquarium or zoo may only become apparent weeks, months, or even years after the
experience, and then only in relation to the individual’s own personal construction
of knowledge. The following section is organized into two parts. The first subsection
deals with connections visitors made between their NAIB visit and their lives six to
eight weeks after the visit. The second subsection addresses the short- and long-term
impacts on visitors’ conceptual understanding of conservation.

Connections visitors made between their lives and their NAIB visit during the six
to eight weeks following their visit-When asked if they had seen, done, or heard
anything that reminded them of their NAIB visit since their visit, most visitors (70%,
n=23) provided general and specific examples. One-quarter of the visitors (24%, n=6)
specifically mentioned that the NAIB visit had inspired or motivated them to visit
other aquariums, zoos, museums, and parks. These visitors also talked about how
things they had seen at these other institutions reminded them of things they had
seen or heard at the NAIB. Nearly one-quarter of the visitors discussed specific
connections they made between their recent NAIB visit and their personal and family
lives (2196, n=5). Several visitors mentioned that they had told other people, particularly friends and family, about their visit (18%, n=4). Another 18% ( n = 4 )

C U R A T O R 4311

JANUARY 2000

49

mentioned specific things they had seen on TV or in the media that made them think
about their recent NAIB visit. Three visitors specifically mentioned having their
pictures developed from their visit and sitting around sharing stories conjured up by
the images. For example, one mom mentioned, “Our daughter likes to look at the pictures they rook so they are constantly reminded. Finally, five visitors mentioned other
general things that reminded them of their aquarium visit, including, eating fish at
a restaurant and “lookingfor biodiversity everywhere.
”

”

Short- and long-term impacts of the NAIB experience on visitors-Both the NAIB
and Institute staff were most interested in investigating the short-term and long-term
impacts of an aquarium visit on visitors’ learning experience. In order to assess this
impact, visitors were asked to share what they thought or felt about conservation.
Visitors’ responses were analyzed along four dimensions: (1) extent: vocabulary used
to describe conservation; ( 2 ) breadth: conceptual categories used to describe conservation; (3) depth: elaboration of conceptual categories; and (4) emotion: magnitude of emotion associated with thoughts about conservation. Table 2 shows the
relative change over time across each dimension.
Extent. Immediately after visiting the NAIB, visitors’ vocabulary used to discuss conservation significantly increased (paired t = 14.071, n = 103, p<O.O01). Most
visitors initially expressed single words and phrases when thinking about conservaTable 2: Short- and long-term changes in visitors’ understanding and thoughts about conservation.

Dimension

EntrylExit
(n=103)

Extent

t = 14.071
~~

Breadth

Entry/G-8 weeks
(n=15)

I

*

t = 2.389
~

t = -7.857
ttt

t = 4.384
tt.

r-pr-p7
Depth

t = 2.529
(n=83)
(n=83) *

* Paired t-test significant at p<0.05.
**’ Paired f-test significant at p<O.OOl.

n.s. Paired t-test not significant at p<0.05.

t = 2.318

50

ADELMAN E T AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

tion. However, upon leaving the NAIB, most visitors shared more detailed thoughts
resulting in the higher vocabulary score. Visitors articulated nearly twice as many
words to describe their thoughts about conservation upon leaving the NAIB. Similarly, six to eight weeks after their visit, visitors’ extent remained significantly greater
than when they first entered the NAIB (paired t=2.389, n= 15, p<0.05).
These vocabulary wordsiideas tended to fall under three broad categories, and
analysis revealed some interesting trends. Most of visitors’ wordsiideas were described
as general vocabulary. This category reflected visitors’ general knowledge relating
to natural resources (e.g., air, water, forests, planet, wildlife, energy), environmental issuesiconcerns (e.g., overpopulation, endangered species, global warming, hunting,
litter, overconsumption, pollution), and even some scientific terminology (e.g., biosphere, ecosystem, biodiversity, food chain, ozone, evolution, ecology, habitats).
Reflective of the overall increase in vocabulary, use of this general vocabulary increased twofold upon exiting the NAIB (paired t=12.02, n=103, p<0.001) and stayed
consistently high even six to eight weeks following their visit (paired t=2.509, n = 15,
p<0.05).
Other wordsiideas reflected visitors’ awareness of actions (personaliglobal) that
positively impact conservation issues, such as care, educate, help, maintain, preserve,
protect, and reduce. Although upon entering the aquarium, visitors expressed their
thoughts about conservation relatively little in terms of actions, action words significantly increased immediately upon leaving the NAIB (paired t=7.556, n = 103,
p<O.O01). After six to eight weeks, however, expression of action words when talking about conservation was no different than upon initially entering the NAIB. These
data suggest that, although the NAIB visit may initially inspire visitors to think about
and talk about conservation in terms of positive actions that can impact the environment and nature, this impact generally did not persist after the visit.
Finally, some wordsiideas reflected visitors’ personal attitudes and judgments
when thinking about conservation, such as crucial, effective, fragile, overwhelming,
shame, ugly, and wrong. These descriptors often provided a sense of visitors’ feelings and attitudes toward conservation issues in general. Upon entering the NAIB,
indications of personal attitudes and judgments toward conservation were generally
low, but nearly doubled immediately after their aquarium visit (paired t = 10.603,
n=103, p<0.001). However, after six to eight weeks visitors infrequently used words
that conveyed personal attitudes and judgments when talking about conservation,
similar to when they initially entered the aquarium.
Breadth. Twelve conceptual categories generally encompassed the range of
visitors’ responses when discussing Conservation (Appendix A). Each visitor received
a score based on the total number of different categories their responses fell into,
regardless of the number of responses representing each category. For instance, if
a visitor gave one response addressing the loss of rainforests and three narrative
statements about the role of overpopulation in various conservation issues, the resulting total number of concepts score was two. This score represented the breadth

CURATOR 43/1

JANUARY 2000

51

of ways visitors sought t o understand a n d articulate their thoughts a b o u t
conservation.
T h e NAIB visit demonstrated a short-term negative change in the number of
ways in which visitors expressed their thoughts about conservation. Upon entering
the NAIB, visitors’ thoughts about conservation represented a wide variety of

Figure 5. The Children’s Cove. Photo by George Grall

52

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

different conceptual categories, with responses from any one individual reflecting three
different categories, on average. Interestingly, visitors’ responses upon leaving the
NAIB represented only one concept, on average (paired t=-7.857, n = 103, p<O.OOl).
In contrast, after six to eight weeks visitors were more likely to share a wider variety of concepts when discussing conservation (paired t=4.384, n = 15, p<O.OOl), nearly
double the number of categories than before their initial visit. Although the NAIB
experience appears to initially focus visitors’ conceptual understanding and association
with conservation, their understanding appears to actually expand over time. The time
delay apparently facilitated assimilation and accommodation of concepts presented
at the NAIB.
Several interesting short-term trends emerged regarding visitors’ responses
among the various conceptual categories. Before entering the NAIB, visitors most
commonly talked about conservation in terms of animals or specific species (38%,
n=3Y), natural resources (62%, n=64), and things that people can and should do
to help out with conservation issues (61%, n=63; Table 2). These concepts likely
represent the daily working knowledge and attitudes of visitors at the aquarium.
Consistent with the decrease in the mean number of categories represented by visitor’s
responses immediately following their visit, the percentage of visitors talking about
each of these categories after their visit decreased dramatically. In fact, this trend
was apparent for seven of the twelve conceptual categories: animals/species, natural resources, values, role of education, government/organization roles and responsibilities, civic awarenesdaction, and worldview.
In contrast, for five categories, more visitors discussed these categories after
their visit than upon entering the NAIB. In particular, despite general fatigue and
eagerness to leave the aquarium, upon exiting, visitors most commonly talked about
conservation in terms of the complex interconnections between animals and their
environment and humans and the environment, as well as the need to balance the
co-existence of people and nature (37%, n=38). Similarly, visitors leaving the
aquarium were more likely to talk about conservation in terms of information and
issues surrounding specific habitats (27%, n =28), particularly rainforests and the coral
reefs, than they were upon entering the aquarium (IS%, n=lY). This response was
most likely due to the intense immersion experience into these habitats that most
visitors experienced at the NAIB. Therefore these habitats and associated issues were
at the forefront of their minds upon leaving. Interestingly, visitors leaving the NAIB
were also slightly more likely than upon entering the aquarium to talk about conservation in terms of complex social/political/cultural/economic factors, root causes
like overpopulation, and respect/appreciation/awareness of humans as stewards and
caretakers of the environment than upon entering the aquarium.
Several long-term impacts also emerged in visitors’ responses in the conceptual categories. Similar to the short-term impact, after six to eight weeks, visitors were
consistently more likely than they were upon entering the aquarium to talk about
conservation in terms of the complex interconnections between animals, humans, and

CURATOR 4311

JANUARY 2000

53

the environment and the need to balance this co-existence, than upon entering the
NAIB (Figure 6). Similarly, although the sample size is small, after six to eight weeks
visitors persisted in discussing conservation in terms of complex social/political/cultural/economic factors and root causes like overpopulation, particularly as compared
to when entering the NAIB. In addition, visitors also continued to talk about conservation in terms of habitats, such as rainforests and coral reefs. Finally, visitors also
talked more about conservation in terms of the important role of education and governments’ and organizations’ roles and responsibilities in helping conservation issues.
In contrast, visitors’ general working knowledge and associations with conservation did not tend to be impacted by the aquarium visit. Although many visitors
talked about conservation in terms of a variety of general topics, including animals/
species, natural resources, values, and civic awareness/action, visitors were no more
likely to talk about conservation in these terms after their aquarium visit than before it.
Depth. The development or detailed elaboration of each of the conceptual
categories represented by visitors’ responses was scored on the following four-point
scale: (1) minimal response, listing only (“bumpersticker/slogun” approach); (2) more
expanded response reflecting general/limited knowledge; (3) expanded and more
specific response reflecting a fair degree of understanding; and (4) highly detailed
and specific response reflecting in-depth understanding. For each visitor, an average score across all categories represented in the pre-, post-, and phone-PMM was
used to compensate for the fact that some visitors tended to be talkative and wanted
to describe several categories in great detail, while others who were in a hurry only
wanted to take the time to explain one or two ideas. In this way, the average scores
helped to remove the time element as a bias in the score.
NAIB visitors’ ability to elaborate on and support their thoughts with detailed
explanations increased significantly (paired t=2.529, n=83, p<0.05) after visiting the
NAIB, and remained high six to eight weeks following the visit (paired t=2.318, n=15,
p<0.05). Entering visitors’ mean depth score upon entering the NAIB was 2.08, 3.12
upon leaving, and 2.98 after six to eight weeks.
Emotion. This scale scores the intensity or magnitude of emotion associated
with responses in each conceptual category. Each conceptual category the visitor
volunteered or was asked about to expand upon in the interview was given a score
on the following four-point scale: ( 1 ) no/little emotion/objective statement; ( 2 ) expected/predictable/“nomuf” level of emotion when talking about conservation issues;
(3) strong attitudes/caring/concern/awareness; and (4) deep personal attitudedcaring/concern often accompanied by a sense of urgency. Again, calculating an average
score across all categories for each individual provided a mechanism for normalizing the effects of some visitors’ tendency to talk only about one concept very strongly.
The NAIB visit increased the emotional intensity with which visitors discussed
conservation in the short term. Entering visitors’ mean score was 2.36, while their
mean score upon leaving was 2.60 (paired t=2.378, n=83, p<0.05). However, after

Worldview

Civic awareness/Action

Govt/Org roles/Responsibilities

Role of education

Values

RespecVAppreciation

Overpopulation

InterconnectionslBalance

Social/Political/Economicfactors

Habitats

Natural resources

Animals/Species

-

0
10

0 PRE

I

20

1
I

40

I

50

POST El PHONE

I

30

Percentage of visitors (%)

-I

60

I

70

80

Figure 6. Relative frequencies (%) of conservation concepts in visitors' interview responses before (PRE), immediately following (POST), and
6-8 weeks after visiting the NAlB (PHONE).

CURATOR 4311

”

JANUARY 2000

55

six to eight weeks, visitors’ emotional attitudes and concerns toward conservation
returned to a level observed upon entering the aquarium.

DISCUSSION

The National Aquarium in Baltimore provides visitors with engaging experiences
including viewing live animal displays, experiencing immersive habitats, and learning from entertaining and informative staff-facilitated presentations. This baseline
study revealed both good and bad news. Consistent with the mission, the good news
is that a visit to the NAIB positively influenced and enriched visitors’ conservationrelated experience, awareness, and knowledge. These positive changes persisted, in
fact in some cases grew, over time. However, there was no evidence that a visit to
the NAIB changed the visiting public’s conservation actions.
Clearly, visitors to the NAIB were a self-selected population that were generally more knowledgeable about, concerned, and inclined to be involved in conservation-related issues than was the general public. Visitors also entered with strong
positive attitudes toward conservation issues and were cognizant of the critical roles
and responsibilities people play in affecting environmental quality, both locally and
globally. Underlying visitors’ attitudes toward conservation was their perception and
understanding of the connections between conservation issues and their personal lives.
Nearly all of the visitors readily perceived connections between conservation issues
and their everyday lives and most readily articulated their thoughts with specific detail.
The majority of NAIB visitors clearly believed humans have a role as caretakers
and stewards of the environment, and emphasized the power and importance of
personal choice as the major connection between people’s daily lives and conservation issues. These visitors recognized themselves and others in society as “choicemakers” and the choices that people make directly impact the environment.
The vast majority of visitors were concerned about a variety of conservation
issues, particularly the decline and extinction of plant and animal species, pollution
issues worldwide, the degradation and loss of aquatic and coastal habitats, and water
quality. NAIB visitors were also consistently more concerned about these issues than
was the public at large. NAIB visitors also perceived themselves as active in conservation issues, and were generally more active than the general public.
However, visitors were far from experts or conservationists. For instance, although the vast majority of visitors were concerned about multiple issues, most were
generally unable to express their concerns in much detail or relate concerns to root
causes, such as overpopulation. Another indicator relates to the term biodiversity;
a widely used term among biologists and a defining concept for present-day conservationists. However, biodiversity was not part of the working vocabulary of the vast
majority of entering visitors. This is consistent with other studies demonstrating that

56

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

public awareness and understanding of the term biodiversity is very low (Anon. 1996;
Louis Harris 1994).
Visitors clearly absorbed the fundamental conservation message at the NAIB.
Visitors’ descriptions of this main message were consistent with their pre-visit understanding of conservation as ‘~resewingiprotectinglsLIving”the environment and
nature. One third of the visitors specifically mentioned that “conservation was the
main message. There was no evidence that visitors’ perception of the main messages
at the NAIB, or for that matter any other knowledge item, attitude, or behavior, was
affected by conversations with researchers before their visit.
The NAIB visit appeared to focus visitors’ conservation-related thoughts, while
also broadening the richness of their conservation-related understanding. For instance,
upon entering the aquarium visitors talked about conservation in a variety of ways,
but with relatively limited specific detail and emotion. Following their visit to the
NAIB, visitors used more words and ideas to articulate fewer thoughts about conservation, but with stronger emotion. More specifically, before entering the NAIB,
visitors most commonly talked about conservation in terms of nature, animals or
specific species, and, in a matter-of-fact manner, things that people can and “should”
do to help “nature. These concepts likely represent the daily working knowledge and
attitudes of the subset of the public likely to visit an aquarium or zoo. However, upon
exiting, visitors typically engaged in passionate conversation about the complex interconnections between animals and their environment and the importance of balancing the needs of humans and the environment.
Changes in visitors’ conservation knowledge, understanding, and interests after visiting the aquarium by and large persisted over several weeks. Overall, the NAIB
affected positive short- and long-term changes in visitors’ understanding and awareness of conservation issues. Not only did the NAIB visit increase visitors’ general
knowledge related to topics addressed at NAIB, but it provoked a greater sense of
awareness and appreciation for conservation issues and the connections between their
own lives and conservation issues. For instance, after six to eight weeks, visitors’
persisted in discussing conservation in terms of complex interconnections and the need
to balance the needs of people and nature. Interestingly, in the long term, visitors
were also more likely than upon entering the NAIB to relate conservation issues to
social/political/ cultural/economic factors and root causes, such as overpopulation.
Overall, the experience appeared to result in a deeper, more enriched understanding of conservation concepts and issues.
The NAIB experience also connected to visitors’ lives in a variety of ways
following their visit. In particular, many visitors specifically noted that the NAIB visit
had inspired or motivated them to visit other aquariums, zoos, museums, and parks.
These visitors talked about how things they had seen at these other institutions
reminded them of things they had seen or heard at the NAIB. Visitors also made
connections between their recent visit and their personal and family lives or things
they had seen on TV or in the media. However, these personal connections rarely
”

”

CURATOR 4.111

JANUARY 2001)

57

related to specific conservation actions. In fact, general enthusiasm and emotional
commitment to conservation-related experiences, which seemed to have been inspired
by their NAIB visit, generally waned back to original levels observed before entering the NAIB. We would hypothesize that this was due to the absence of suitable
reinforcing experiences.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Thc study provided evidence that NAIB experiences positively affected visitors’
knowledge in both the short and long term and visitor attitudes in the short term.
There was little evidence that a visit to the NAIB significantly influenced conservation-related behavior. As intended, this baseline investigation shed considerable light
o n who currently visits the NAIB, how these visitors utilize the aquarium, and what
the effects this visit currently has o n adults. These results reveal the degree to which
the NAIB, and quite likely other comparable institutions, currently fulfill their educational mission. Specifically, this investigation provides a basis for identifying additional steps that might be taken in order to enhance the visitor experience.
By better understanding the incoming knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of
visitors, the aquarium can:

Figure 7. Tiny tots at the Exploration Station in the Marine Mammal pavilion. Photo by George
Grall.

5s

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATIONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

(1) Focus on issues and/or topics that could generate significant intellectual
and emotional engagement with the institution.
( 2 ) Understand what significant gaps currently exist in visitors’ knowledge,
attitudes, and behavior that might be amenable to intervention.
Not only d o these results clarify who is visiting, they also clarify who is not
visiting the aquarium. What steps can the aquarium take in order to attract and “speak
to” members of the public less interested and already committed to environmental
issues?
Given the challenge of influencing long-term behaviors, the aquarium must work
to build visitors’ experiences that leave an imprint long after the public leaves the
aquarium. Possible strategies include:
(1) Map the relative role of other related organizations upon NAIB visitors
and develop a model for understanding how the institution can reinforce
and build upon what is happening throughout the entire educational
infrastructure.

( 2 ) Provide visitors with educational programs and materials that are aggressively and specifically designed to extend the visitor experience in time and
space; including Web sites, public lectures, take-home activities, and books
and materials sold at the gift shop.
Results from this study are also guiding subsequent investigations at the NAIB.
As we design follow-up investigations we will strive to address the causes and effects
of NAIB impact with a higher degree of certainty and specificity, both as a function
of museum experiences and as a function of post-museum visit events. In the ongoing Phase I1 study, we are attempting to definitively document the ways in which a
visit to the NAIB contributes to the public’s long-term conservation knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors. We are also investigating the role of NAIB’s new permanent exhibition, the ‘2mazon River Forest, in changing visitors’ conservation knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors. In Phase 11, we are also piloting a n investigation
designed to determine if a visit to the NAIB Web site influences visitors’ subsequent
conservation actions.
Topics for future investigations include:
”

(1) The possibility of identifying a set of “keystone” exhibitions which, by virtue
of content, location, or popularity, can serve as reliable indicators of visitor
behavior and learning throughout the aquarium. This approach, similar
to the “keystone species” approach in ecology, could possibly obviate the
need to forever track visitors throughout the entire institution o r gallery.
( 2 ) Determining the optimum time duration for investigating long-term impact. Theoretically, there is some time period immediately following a
museum experience when additional experiences are likely to significantly
enhance learning that was initiated in the museum, another period beyond

CURATOR 43/1

JANUARY 2000

59

the first in which additional experiences make some difference, and, finally, a time period beyond the second period when most visitors would
be unaffected by additional educational experiences. Can we map this
terrain, or is it unique and individual-specific?

( 3 ) If it is feasible, as has been done at the California Science Center (cf. Falk
et al., in press), to develop or identify a reliable “marker” that is unique
to the NAIB visitor experience. Such a marker would represent a specific
knowledge, attitude, o r behavior that visitors are likely to acquire only at
the aquarium. This marker would permit both short- and long-term tracking of visitors and would enable the aquarium to better understand and
document their educational effect.

In conclusion, we have c o m e a long way in being able t o reliably a n d
validly assess the impact of museums on visitor learning. However, we still have a
ways to go.
REFERENCES

Anonymous. 1996. Current Trends in Public Opinion on the Environment: Environmental
Compendium Update. Washington, DC: Belden and Russonello Research and Communications.
Anderson, D. 1999. Understanding the impact of post-visit activities on students’ knowledge construction of electricity and magnetism as a result of a visit to an interactive
science centre. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Queensland University of Technology.
Brisbane, Australia.
Anderson, D., K. B. Lucas, I. S. Ginns, and L. D. Dierking. 2000. Development of knowledge
about electricity and magnetism during a visit to a science museum and related postvisit activities. Science Education 84(5):658-79.
Brice Heath, S., and L. Smyth. 1999. ArtShow: Youth and community development. Washington, DC: Partners for Livable Communities.
Chadwick, J. 1998. Public utilization of museum-based WorldWideWeb sites. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. University of New Mexico.
Chadwick, J., J. H. Falk, and B. O’Ryan. 2000. Assessing institutional Web sites. In
Collections, Content, and the Web, 60-73. Washington, DC: Council on Library and
Information Resources.
Crane, V., H. Nicholson, M. Chen, and S . Bitgood 1994. Informal Science Learning: What
Research Says About Television, Science Museums, and Community-Based Projects.
Deadham, MA: Research Communications Ltd.
Eveland, W. and S. Dunwoody. 1997. Communicating science to the public via “The Why
Files” World Wide Web. Paper presented at 1997 International Conference on the
Public Understanding of Science and Technology, Chicago, IL.
Falk, J . H . 1998. Pushing the boundaries: Assessing the long-term impact of museum
experiences. Current Trends, vol. 11, pp. 1-6. Washington, DC: Committee on
Audience Research and Development.

60

ADELMAN ET AL.

IMPACT OF NATlONAL AQUARIUM IN BALTIMORE

Fdk, J. H., P. Brooks, and R. Amin. 2001. Investigating the long-term impact of a science
center on its community: The California Science Center L.A.S.E.R. Project. In J. Falk,
ed. Free-Choice Science Education: How We Learn Science Outside of School. New York:
Teacher’s College Press, Columbia University. In press.
Falk, J. H., D. Combs, R. Amin, and J. K. Olson, (in press). Assessing the educational impact
of a science center high entertainment, multi-media theater experience. Science Education.
Falk, J. H., and L. D. Dierking. 1992. The Museum Experience. Washington, DC: Whalesback
Books.
. 2000. Learningtom Museums: Visitor Erperiences and the Making of Meaning. Walnut
Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Falk, J., T Moussouri, and D. Coulson. 1998. The effect of visitors’ agendas on museum
learning. Curator 41(2):106-20.
Gambone, M. A., and A. Arbreton. 1097. Safe Havens: The Contributions of Kwth Otganizations to Healthy Adolescent Development. Philadelphia: Public/Privatc Ventures.
Gross, L. 1997. The impact of television on modern life and attitudes. Paper presented at
1997 International Conference on the Public Understanding of Science and Technology, Chicago, IL.
Louis Harris and Associates, Inc. 1994. Science and Nature Survey. New York: American
Museum of Natural History.
Medrich, E. A. 1991. Young adolescents and discretionary time use: The naturc of life
outside of school. Paper commissioned by the Carnegie Council on Adolescent
Development for its Task Force on Youth Development and Community Programs.
National Environmental Education and Training Foundation. November, 1997. Thc. National
Report Curd on Environmental Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors. Washington, DC:
Roper Starch Worldwide.

NOTES

1. Only visitors who participated in the paired prc/post interviews were asked their
reasons for visiting the NAIB (N=100).
2. W h e r e interview results a r e described in this report, percentages may not
total 100% as more than one answer was accepted from visitors in response to each
question.
3. A t-test for comparison of means determined no significant diffcrence at p<O.Ol.
4. A paired t-test for comparison of means determined no significant difference
at p<o.01.
5. A paired t-test for comparison of means determined no significant difference
at p<O.Ol.

CURATOR 4311

61

JANUARY 2000

Appendix A: PMM Conceptual categories.
Category
(1 1
AnimalslSpecies
subject matter content

Information and issues surrounding specific animals or
animals in general. Emphasis and/or concern for the
animals/species.

(2)
Natural Resources
subject matterlcontent

Information and issues surrounding natural resources in
general, such as air, water, land, energy or specific
resources, such as coal and oil. Emphasis and/or concern
for the resources.

Habitats subject
matterlcontent

SociallPoliticallCulturall
Economic subject
matterlcontent

Information and issues surrounding habitats in general,
such as forests and oceans, or specific habitats, such as
rainforests and coral reefs. Emphasis and/or concern for
the habitats.
References to roles of social, political, cultural, and
economic factors as related to conservation issues.

(5)
Interconnections/
Balance content

References to the interconnections between animals and
the environment and people and the environment. lnforma
tion and issues surrounding balance and co-existence of
people and nature.

(6)
Overpopulation
content

Specific references to role of overpopulation in conservation issues.

(7)
RespectlAppreciation
for nature content
(8)
ValueslMotivational
content

References to awareness, appreciation and respect for
nature, the environment, and the role of humans as
caretakers and stewards.
References to values and motivations as related to
conservation issues for self or people in general.

(9)

References to role of education as related to conservation
issues. Need for, importance of, lack of, etc.

(10) Governmentl
Organizations
RoleslResponsibilities
content

References to roles, responsibilities, expectations of
governments and organizations as related to conservation
issues.

(11)
Civic Awareness/
Action

References to general and specific things people/individuals can do to impact conservation issues, including
thouahts and actions.

Roles of
Education content

I

Description

(12)
Worldview

References to attitudes toward and beliefs about people
and society in general.

