Interactive Humanoid Robots for a Science Museum
Masahiro Shiomi1,2 Takayuki Kanda2 Hiroshi Ishiguro1,2 Norihiro Hagita2
1 Osaka University
Osaka 565-0871
Japan

2 ATR IRC Laboratories
Kyoto 619-0288
Japan

m-shiomi@atr.jp kanda@atr.jp ishiguro@atr.jp hagita@atr.jp
society. Many robots have already been applied to various fields
in daily environments. Table 1 gives an overview of the previous
works. There are mainly two kinds of fields: closed and open. The
difference between a closed and an open environment lies in the
people who are interacting. In a closed environment, such as an
elementary school or an office, robots interact with a limited
group of people [2-5]. On the contrary, we chose to work in an
open environment because we expect that many people, in a widerange of ages, will interact with robots. In line with this prospect,
we have been developing a science museum guide robot that we
believe to be a promising application.

ABSTRACT
This paper reports on a field trial with interactive humanoid
robots at a science museum where visitors are supposed to study
and develop an interest in science. In the trial, each visitor wore
an RFID tag while looking around the museum’s exhibits.
Information obtained from the RFID tags was used to direct the
robots' interaction with the visitors. The robots autonomously
interacted with visitors via gestures and utterances resembling the
free play of children [1]. In addition, they performed exhibitguiding by moving around several exhibits and explaining the
exhibits based on sensor information. The robots were highly
evaluated by visitors during the two-month trial. Moreover, we
conducted an experiment in the field trial to compare the detailed
effects of exhibit-guiding and free-play interaction under three
operating conditions. This revealed that the combination of the
free-play interaction and exhibit-guiding positively affected
visitors’ experiences at the science museum.

There is a double benefit in choosing a science museum as the
experiment field. On the one hand, visitors are going to have the
opportunity to interact with the robots and experience the
advanced technologies by which they are made, which is the
fundamental purpose of a science museum. Thus, we can easily
deploy our research to a real environment.
On the other hand, in a science museum we are naturally targeting
people who are interested in science and are unlikely to miss the
chance to interact with our robots; thus this field is one of the best
choices for collecting feedback and examining the interaction
between people and the communication robot in various tasks.
The need for extensive and accurate feedback goes back to our
belief that interaction with humans through tasks is one of the
communication robot’s essential roles. This feedback is vital for
developing the ability for the robots to act appropriately in a daily
living environment.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User
Interfaces – Interaction styles, I.2.9 [Artificial Intelligence]:
Robotics

General Terms: Design, Experimentation, Human Factors
Keywords: Commutation robot, Field trial, Human-robot
interaction, Science museum robot

Some robots have already been developed [7, 8] that include
functions like robust navigation and direction-giving in an open
environment. However, the interactions of those robots are of the
master-slave type (giving commands to the robot), which is quite
different from the peer-type interaction we are expecting, i.e., as
humans, pet animals, and AIBO [2] are capable of. We are
attempting to emphasize the importance of this type of interaction.
People think of their peers as “equals” when communicating with
them. Thus we believe that achieving such a peer-type interaction
between humans and robots makes the communication between
them more natural and human-like. We can also expect that such
an interaction will reduce the psychological distance between
humans and robots. Moreover, particularly for the visitors of the
science museum, it will help to stimulate their interest in science.

1. INTRODUCTION
The development of robots is entering a new stage where the
focus is placed on interaction with people in their daily
environments. The concept of the communication robot is rapidly
emerging. The communication robot will act as a peer providing
mental, communicational, and physical support. Such interactive
tasks are of importance for allowing robots to take a part in human

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
HRI'06, March 2–4, 2006, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-294-1/06/0003...$5.00.

Our approach to these field experiments is unique: the robots use
environmental sensors to work in a complex, crowded
environment that would otherwise make simple functions such as
person identification very difficult. We covered the experimental
field at a science museum with cameras and wireless tag readers
(RFID). The robot retrieves its coordinates from these ubiquitous

305

TABLE 1 Various field experiments with interactive robots
People
Environment

Closed

Open

Function

Interaction

Location

Purpose

Home

Entertainment [2]

o

x

x

x

-

o

Hospital

Mental care [3]

o

x

x

x

-

o

School

Language education [4]

x

o

x

o

-

o

Office

Guiding [5]

x

o

o

x

o

-

Lobby

Interaction [6]

o

o

x

x

-

o

Guidance & navigation [7,8]

o

o

o

x

o

-

Interaction & guidance [This paper]

o

o

o

o

-

o

Museum

Wide age With many
Navigation
range
people

Peer type

The following sections describe the details of the Osaka Science
Museum environment, the humanoid robots, and the sensors.

sensors. It is able to identify visitors and call them by their names
by detecting their RFID tags. This approach enables the robots to
provide more pertinent information in their interaction, such as
recommendations based on the visitor’s movement history. We
are exploring the potential of communication robots in various
fields with this approach.
This article reports on an experiment in which a system using
many ubiquitous sensors and humanoid robots -- Robovies -guided the visitors of a science museum. In this setting the
Robovies interacted with the visitors and showed them around to
exhibits according to information from ubiquitous sensors, such
as the visitors' positions and movement histories. During the twomonth experiment, visitors enjoyed interacting with the robots and
highly appreciated them.

2.1 Science museum environment
Seventy-five exhibits were positioned on the fourth floor of the
Osaka Science Museum. Figure 1 shows a map of the fourth floor
of the museum, around which people walk in a counterclockwise
direction.
Typically, visitors go through the following steps:
1) If a visitor decides to register as part of our project, such
personal data as name, birthday, and age (under 20 or not) is
gathered at the reception desk (Fig. 1, point A). The system binds
that data to the ID of an RFID tag and automatically produces a
synthetic voice for the visitor’s name. The visitor receives a tag at
the reception desk.

2. SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
We used four humanoid robots for interaction with visitors in
guidance and giving explanations. The robots behaved as follows:
- One robot served as a guide to the exhibits.
- Two stationary robots explained the exhibits.
- As visitors prepared to leave, one robot greeted them by name,
asked them to return their RFID tags, and said goodbye.
In addition, we installed many sensors to record the movements
and positions of visitors via their RFID tags on the fourth floor of
the Osaka Science Museum. The interaction data between robots
and visitors were recorded on a central database.

Figure 1.

Person
Master slave
identification

2) When the visitor strolls around the fourth floor wearing the
RFID tag, the RFID tag readers detect its signal and the system
records the information at regular time intervals of about 1.5 sec.
3) Four robots are placed at positions B, C, and D on the fourth
floor, as shown in Fig. 1. After finishing, visitors return their tags
at the exit point (Fig. 1, point E).

Map of the fourth floor of the Osaka Science Museum

306

these shortcomings by installing many RFID tag readers in the
environment.

2.2 Humanoid robots
1) Robovie:
Figure 2 shows “Robovie,” an interactive humanoid robot
characterized by its human-like physical expressions and its
various sensors. The reason we used humanoid robots is because a
human-like body is useful to naturally control the attention of
humans [9]. The human-like body consists of a head, a pair of
eyes, and two arms. When combined, these parts can generate the
complex body movements required for communication. We
decided on a robot height of 120 cm to decrease the risk of
scaring children. The diameter was 40 cm. The robot has two 4*2
DOFs (degrees of freedom) in its arms, 3 DOFs in its head, and a
mobile platform. It can synthesize and produce a voice via a
speaker. We also attached an RFID tag reader to Robovie [4] that
enables it to identify the individuals around it. Two of the four
robots used in this experiment were Robovies.

To achieve approximate distance estimation, we set the RFID tag
readers to have eight levels of sensitivity. Detection areas,
however, are affected by the position of the RFID tag readers and
reflections due to walls. Therefore, we measured each detection
area prior to the experiment. We then attached the tag readers in
positions two meters above the floor, and to successfully detect
the tags we had to set the reader sensitivity level to at least five.

2) Robovie-M:

We placed an infrared LED on top of a Robovie and attached
infrared cameras to the ceiling to determine the robot’s correct
position. The system produces binary images from the infrared
cameras and detects bright areas. It calculates absolute
coordinates with a reference to the weighted center of the
detection area and sends them to the database.

Fig 1 shows an example of the positioning of tag readers. We
placed them around particular exhibits, so that the system could
detect whether visitors approached them. Moreover, since a tag
reader’s detection field has a torus shape, the system can estimate
the tag position by superposing the circles calculated from the
reader outputs (Figure 5).
2) Infrared cameras:

Figure 3 shows a “Robovie-M” humanoid robot characterized by
its human-like physical expressions. We decided on a height of 29
cm for this robot. Robovie-M has 22 DOFs and can perform twolegged locomotion, bow its head, and do a handstand. We used a
personal computer and a pair of speakers to enable it to speak,
since it was originally unequipped for that.

Infrared camera positions are shown in Fig. 1. The distance
between the floor and the ceiling is about 4 m. The width and
height of images from an infrared camera is 320 and 240 pixels,
respectively. One pixel represents about 1 cm2 of area.

The two other robots in this experiment were Robovie-Ms.

3) Video cameras:
The video camera positions are also shown in Fig. 1. The output
images of each video camera are recorded by a PC and used to
analyze the data generated by the experiment.

Figure 2. Robovie

2.3

Figure 3. Robovie-M

Embedded sensors in an environment:

On the fourth floor of the Osaka Science Museum, we installed 20
RFID tag readers (Spider-IIIA, RF-CODE), which included the
two equipped on the Robovies, three infrared sensors, and four
video cameras. All sensor data were sent to a central server
database through an Ethernet network.

Figure 4. The ubiquitous sensors

In the following sections, we describe each type of sensor used.
1) RFID tag readers:
We used an active type of RFID tag. This technology enables easy
identification of individuals: detection is unaffected by the
occurrence of occlusions, the detection area is wide, and the
distance between the tag reader and an RFID tag can be roughly
estimated. Such benefits are suitable for large environments.
However, drawbacks include low accuracy over long distances
and the inability to detect exact positions. We compensated for

Figure 5. Detection fields of the RFID tag

307

The robot can guide people to four kinds of exhibits by randomly
determining the target. Figure 7 shows an example of this
behavior. When bringing visitors to the telescope, the robot says,
“I am taking you to an exhibit, please follow me!” (a), and
approaches the telescope (b, c). It suggests that the person look
through it and then talks about its inventor (d).

3. ROBOT BEHAVIORS
In this section, we introduce the roles and behaviors of the robots.
For friendly interaction with visitors, robots need information
about them. For example, children’s interest increases when the
machines call them by name [4]. Moreover, human interactions
are characterized by a shared memory of events.

4) Guiding people to exhibits: Using information from RFID tags

It is difficult for the robots themselves to acquire this information
about visitors, such as their names and memories. However,
sensors enable them to capture this data through, for example, an
Ethernet network. That way the robots can act more intelligently
and overcome the limitations of their features. In addition, in this
system we use Robovies as sensors because they contain an RFID
tag readers. In effect, they became not only interactive robots but
also part of the sensor system.

The RFID tags’ data are also used for interaction. We used the
amount of time that visitors spent near an exhibit can use to judge
whether visitors tried an exhibits. For example, when an RFIDtagged visitor has stayed around the “magnetic power” exhibit
longer than a predefined time, the system assumes that the visitor
has already tried it. Thus, the robot says, “Yamada-san, thank you
for trying ‘magnetic power.’ What did you think of it?” If the
system assumes that the visitor has not tried it, the robot will ask,
"Yamada-san, you didn't try ‘magnetic power.’ It’s really fun, why
don’t you give it a try?”

3.1 Locomotive robot
We used a Robovie for the locomotive robot that moved around in
parts of the environment, interacted with visitors, and guided them
to exhibits.
1) Interaction with humans: Childlike interaction
The robot can engage in such childlike behavior as handshaking,
hugging, and the game of “rock, paper, and scissors.” Moreover, it
has such reactive behaviors as avoidance and gazing at a touched
part of its body, as well as such patient behavior as solitary
playing and moving back and forth. Figure 6 shows interaction
scenes between Robovies and visitors.

(a) Robovie shakes hands

(b) A child touching Robovie

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 7. Robovie guiding visitors to the telescope

3.2 Robots that talk with each other
Two stationary robots (Robovie and Robovie-M) casually talk
about the exhibits as humans do with accurate timing because they
are synchronized with each other using an Ethernet network. The
topic itself is intelligently determined by data from RFID tags. By
knowing the previous visiting course of a visitor, the robots can
try to interest the visitor in an exhibit he or she overlooked by
starting a conversation on that exhibit.
(c) Robovie saying goodbye

(d) Robovie hugging children

Figure 8 shows robots talking. The flow and an example of
dialogue are given below:

Figure 6. Scenes of interaction between visitors and Robovies
2) Interaction with humans: Using information from RFID tags

(1) Robovie-M explains an exhibit.

The robot can detect RFID tag signals around itself by using its
RFID tag reader, which allows it to obtain personal data on
visitors using RFID tag IDs. It can greet visitors by name or wish
them a happy birthday, and so on. In addition, the system records
the time that visitors spend on the fourth floor of the Osaka
Science Museum. The robot can behave according to that time.

(2) Robovie asks Robovie-M a question about it. For example,
“Who made it?”

3) Guiding people to exhibits: Human guidance

(Robovie): “That’s incredible! How does it do that?”

(3) Robovie-M answers the question and expounds on its answer.
(Robovie-M): “That chair can float, even if a person is sitting on
it.”

308

- I had fun because the robots called me by name.
- We felt close to the robots.

(Robovie-M): “By magnetic power.”
(Robovie): “I wonder if I can sit on that…”

The results revealed that visitors held favorable impressions
toward the presence of the robots. Moreover, visitors described
their favorite robot behavior, such as hugging, the calling out of
names, and so on. Such behaviors are basic elements of human
society.

(Robovie-M): “I doubt it.”

The freely described opinions of visitors were analyzed and
revealed that visitors’ opinions of the robots differed according to
age [10]. For example, younger respondents did not necessarily
like the robots more than elder respondents.
(a) Two robots talking

(b) Two robots talking to visitors

5
4

Figure 8. Scenes of robots talking to each other

3

3.3 A robot bidding farewell

2

This robot is positioned near the exit and, after requesting data
from their RFID tags, says goodbye to the departing visitors. It
also reorients visitors on the tour who are lost by examining the
visitor’s movement history and time spent on the fourth floor of
the Osaka Science Museum, which was recorded by the system. If
visitors walk clockwise, they will immediately see this robot at the
beginning and will be pointed in the right direction by the robot.
Figure 9 shows a scene with this robot.

(a) The visitor talking to the robot
Figure 9.

1
res
inte

ting

n
fr ie

dly

e
ts
tion
ctiv
obo
rac
effe
re r
nte
u
i
t
r
u
f
fo
for
iety
iety
anx
anx

Figure 10. Results of returned questionnaires

(b) The robot telling the way

Figure 11.

Gender of visitors

Figure 12.

Age of visitors

The robot bidding farewell

4. EXPERIMENT
4.1 A two-month exhibition
We performed experiments to investigate the impressions made by
robots on visitors to the fourth floor of the Osaka Science
Museum during a two-month period. As they departed the fourth
floor, we asked visitors to complete a questionnaire by ranking
five factors on a scale of 1-to-5, where 5 is the most positive.
They were also encouraged to give other opinions on the robots.
By the end of the two-month period, the number of visitors had
reached 91,107, the number of subjects who wore RFID tags was
11,927 and the number of returned questionnaires was 2,891.
Figure 10 shows the results. It indicates that most visitors had a
good impression of the robots and they did not feel anxiety about
robots in the future. Figure 11 and 12 display the age and gender
of subjects who wore RFID tags and returned questionnaires.
These results indicate that most questionnaires were returned by
woman and visitors in their 30’s and 40’s. We think that this trend
happened because only adults were asked to fill in the
questionnaires, and the typical visitor group was a mother
accompanying her child.) Most opinions were:

4.2 Experiments on the behavior of robots
We performed experiments in which we examined the behavior of
robots under three operating conditions during one week. We
randomly exchanged conditions between the morning and the
afternoon. The subjects were the visitors who had RFID tags and
played with the robots. After their interaction ended, we asked
them to fill out a questionnaire in which they rated three items on
a scale of 1-to-7, where 7 is the most positive.
The items were “Presence of the robots” (What did you think
about the presence of robots in the science museum?),
“Usefulness as a guide” (What was the degree of the robots’
usefulness for easily looking around the exhibits?), and

- We had a really good time.

309

“Experience of science & technology” (How much did the robots
increase your interest in science and technology?). The subjects
were also encouraged to provide other opinions about the robots
as well. The three operating conditions were the following:

7

1) Interaction

6

Robots behaved according to predefined functions. Each robot
engaged in basic interaction, as described in Section 3.1.1. No
guide function was performed

5
Score

*

* : p<0.05
Interaction

Guide

4
3

2) Guidance

2

The role of the robots was limited to guiding and giving
explanations. Each robot only behaved as described in Section
3.1.3.

1
Presence of Usefulness Experience
the robots as a guide of science &
technology

Interaction,
guidance
and using
RFID

3) Interaction, guidance and using RFID tags
Figure 13. Results for the three operating conditions

In this operating condition the robots not only combined the
previous two operating conditions but also used data from the
RFID tags. Each robot preformed every kind of behavior
introduced in Section 3.1.

5. DISCUSSION
5.1 Contributions to HRI research
More than ninety thousand people visited the exhibition, more
than ten thousand people interacted with the robots and wore
RFID tags, and about three thousand people returned
questionnaires. The results showed that most visitors evaluated
the robots highly.

It is difficult to compare the conditions of "using RFID" and "not
using RFID". For example, in the “Guide” condition, using
information on the RFID tag necessitates that the robot behave
interactively, such as calling someone by name. Also, it is difficult
to compare the effects of each behavior in the crowded situations.
Thus, we use this operating condition for comparing the
importance of the information on the RFID tags between the
above conditions.

In the "Interaction, guide, and using RFID" condition,
"Experience of science & technology" showed a significant
difference. Human-guide-like guiding with childlike free-play
interaction attracted the interest of visitors more than simply
guiding.

4.3 Results of robots’ behavior
About 100 questionnaires were returned for each operating
condition. Figure 13 shows the results and their averages, which
are mostly above 6. There was a significant difference for the
following item: “Experience of science & technology,” as to
whether the robot was in the “Interaction, guidance and using
RFID” operating condition or in another condition (p<.05).

We believe that free-play interaction and human-guide-like
guiding improve the visitors' interest in science technology
because the visitors played actively with the robots and with the
exhibits via the interaction of the robots.
In addition to these findings, we believe that this trial
demonstrated the positive possibility of using interactive robots in
open environments, which is one of the most important
contributions of this work. Human-robot interaction was
considered only as a kind of entertainment when research on
interactive robots started. Our perspective (and that of many other
researchers) is very different. We believe that robots will be part
of the fundamental infrastructure of our society and will support a
wide range of our daily activities. We believe that it is important
to demonstrate possible applications of interactive robots, such as
those in [4, 6], and this work particularly demonstrated the
possibility for use in an open environment where both the novelty
and interactivity of the robots were appreciated.

A comparison of the three conditions’ results based on analysis of
variance revealed no significant differences between the two items
of “Presence of the robots” and “Usefulness as a guide.”
Concerning this last item, here are examples of some of the most
remarkable feedback:
- Children developed an interest in other exhibits after being led
to them or having them explained by a robot.
- Children were amused by the robot’s reactions to being touched
and became interested in new exhibited items when following it.
These opinions indicate that interest in science is developed by
possible interaction with robots. Other feedback opinions attest to
the good impressions that robots made on subjects.

5.2 The system components
Generally, it is not so easy to evaluate large-scale systems used in
a field trial. It sometimes forces us to show easily-comparable
results, such as the questionnaire answers, as the result of the field
trial. However, it does not always demonstrate the essential
meaning of the trial, particularly for a system in its earlier phase.
In our research, many system components were integrated in the
whole system, but the questionnaire answers, such as “most of the
visitors were happy about the robots,” do not tell us anything
about how each system component contributed to the system and
how we can further investigate human-robot interaction.

On the other hand, robots sometimes could not interact well with
visitors. For example, some children were afraid to interact with
robots and some visitors did not care about the robots' actions.
Moreover, visitors' opinions included some negative impressions
such as "we couldn't talk to the robots because the speech ability
of the robots was not good". These show that the interaction
ability of the robots was not good enough for an open
environment.

310

One implication is that showing a robots’ conversation can attract
people and convey information to them, even though its
interactivity is very low. Such examples are also shown in our
other work [11, 12]. Currently, robots’ interactivity is actually
quite low because of their limited sensing ability, particularly in a
daily environment. This forces an interactive robot to use limited
sensor information, such as only tactile sensors without speech
recognition.

Here, we discuss how each of the system components
contributed to the whole system, and how visitors interacted with
them by introducing interesting scenes of visitors’ interaction as a
case study.
Locomotive robot
• Often there were many adults and children crowded around
the robot. In crowded situations, mainly a few children
simultaneously interacted with the robot in turn.
• Similar to Robovie’s free-play interaction in a laboratory [1],
children shook hands, played the paper-rock-scissors game,
hugged, and so forth. Sometimes they imitated the robot’s body
movements, such as the robot’s exercising.
• When the robot started to move to a different place (in front of
an exhibit), some children followed the robot to the destination.
• After the robot explained about a telescope exhibit, one child
went to use the telescope. When he came back around the robot,
another child used the telescope.
• Its name-calling behavior attracted many visitors. They tried
to show the RFID tags embedded in the nameplates to the robot.
Often, when one visitor did this, several other visitors began
showing the robots their nameplates, too, as if they were
competing to have their names called.
• When the robot called a child’s name, the child and his/her
mother smiled and were satisfied with it, while other children
again tried to show their nameplates. Such a scene was often
observed. Sometimes, a child and his/her parent waited more than
ten minutes to have their name called by the robot. (The robot
called one of the visitors’ names around the robot, which is highly
affected by the radio strength. Some tags’ radio strength seems to
have been weaker than the others’.)
• A visitor reported that when the robot moved to him, he
thought that it was aware of him, which made him happy.

Robot bidding farewell
• There were two types of typical visitors’ behavior. One is just
to watch the robot’s behavior.
• The other is, again, to expect to have their name called. In this
case, the visitors often showed their name to the robots.
• Many children listened to the robot’s utterances, such as
“Yamada-kun, thank you for visiting today. Please return the
nameplate to the exit booth over there.” After that, they
immediately returned the nameplates to the exit booth.
The cost of Robovie-M is far cheaper than that of Robovie-II.
Although its functionality is very limited, such as its small size,
no embedded speech functions (we placed a speaker nearby), and
no sensors (an RFID reader was also placed nearby), it entertained
many visitors. We believe that this indicates the effectiveness of
ubiquitous sensors. The simple robot was endowed with
ubiquitous sensors, giving it a more attractive interaction
capability. Particularly, the effectiveness of the name-calling
behavior was again demonstrated, as seen in the children’s
behavior of returning their RFID tags.
RFID tags and tag readers
As shown in the scenes of interaction with the robots, the
application of RFID technology largely promoted the humanrobot interaction, particularly with regard to the name-calling
behavior. However, the information obtained from the distributed
RFID tag readers made a relatively small contribution to the
system. Robots talked to the visitors about their exhibit-visiting
experience, such as “You did not see the telescope exhibit, did
you? It is very interesting. Please try it,” based on the information
from the RFID reader network, but it seemed to be less attractive
and impressive to the visitors. This was also pointed out in our
previous work [13]. (At that time, we thought it was due to the
small environment.) Perhaps, robots are too novel for visitors, so
they highly appreciate their experience of interacting with the
robots while less attention is paid to the detailed services that they
offer.

We believe that there are many implications in these observations.
In particular, it reminds us of the importance of making a robot
move around. It enables the robot to attract people to interact with
it. Moreover, as shown in the scene where children followed the
locomotive robot, it drew their attention to the exhibit, although
the exhibit (a telescope) was relatively not so attractive. (There are
many attractive exhibits to move and operate to gain an
understanding of science, such as a pulley and a lever.) We
demonstrated that robots can provide visitors with the opportunity
to play with and study science through exhibits they might have
otherwise missed.
Another interesting aspect was that it might moderate an overly
crowded situation where people gathered around the robot due to
its novelty. As shown in the above scene, the robot’s locomotion
triggers people who are very interested in it to follow it while
others may not.

Other ubiquitous sensors
Regarding the ubiquitous sensors other than the RFID tags, their
role was limited. The infrared camera supplied the exact position
of the robot, which was very helpful in the crowded environment.
We believe that there will be much information from ubiquitous
sensors available for human-robot interaction, which should be
included in our future work. (We conducted further research on
this, which is under submission to this HRI conference [14]).

Robots that talk to each other
• There were two types of typical visitors’ behavior. One is just
to listen to the robots’ talk. For example, after listening to it, the
visitors talked about the exhibit that was explained to them, and
sometimes visited the exhibit.
• The other is to expect to have their name called. In this case,
the visitors paid rather less attention to the robots’ talk, and
instead showed their name to the robots, which is similar to the
actions observed around the locomotive robot. Often the visitor
left the front of the robot just after his/her name was called.

5.3 Needs for social abilities in the robots
Although we demonstrated our robots in an open field as an early
application of interactive robots, our robots were basically
designed to interact with a few people who are already interested
in interacting with robots. Here, we discuss the need for social
abilities in the robots for open environments, which our robots
currently lack, by showing several scenes of interaction.

311

• When the robot started to explain about an exhibit, visitors
were sometimes too busy to try to evoke reactions from the robot,
such as by touching the robot, and failed to follow the context.
This resulted in the failure of the explanation: visitors continued
to play with the robot while it spoke about an exhibit, and it did
not react to the visitors.
• The robot tried to draw the attention of a child by calling his
name, “Play with me, Yamada-kun.” At that time there were a
crowd of visitors who wore nameplates. All of the others got
interested in having their name called, such as by showing their
nameplate to the robot, and no longer listened to the robot’s
utterances except for the name-calling behavior.
• Children found the robot’s exercise behavior and hugging
behavior entertaining; however, when there were only adults
around the robot, these behaviors made them hesitate to interact
with it. Interestingly, when a mother was in front of the robot with
her children, she enjoyed its hugging behavior.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Ishiguro, H., Imai, M., Maeda, T., Kanda, T., and Nakatsu,
R. Robovie: an interactive humanoid robot, Int. J. Industrial
Robot, Vol. 28, No. 6, pp.498-503, 2001.
[2] Fujita, M. “AIBO: Toward the era of digital creatures,” Int.
J. Robot. Res., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 781–794, 2001.
[3] Shibata, T. “An overview of human interactive robots for
psychological enrichment”, The proceedings of IEEE
November 2004
[4] Kanda, T., Hirano, T., Eaton, D., and Ishiguro, H.
“Interactive Robots as Social Partners and Peer Tutors for
Children: A Field Trial,” Journal of Human Computer
Interaction, Vol. 19, No. 1-2, pp. 61-84, 2004.
[5] Asoh, H., Hayamizu, S., Hara, I., Motomura, Y., Akaho, S.,
and Matsui, T. “Socially Embedded Learning of the OfficeConversant Mobile Robot Jijo-2,” Int. Joint Conf. on
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 1997.

We believe that these scenes demonstrate the needs of further
study and development of the robot’s social abilities. The first
scene reminds us of the importance of drawing people’s attention
to an appropriate target, such as the robot itself, or the target
object it is talking about, depending on the situation. However,
the second scene warns us against drawing an individual's
attention in a crowded situation, although it is powerful to use
one’s name for that purpose. As shown in the second scene,
although the name-calling behavior was attractive and powerful
for drawing the attention of a visitor, it sometimes disturbed the
social-attention of the visitors. In addition, from the third scene,
we can learn the importance of paying careful attention to
people’s attributes, including but not limited to their adult-child
and group membership. (We have implemented many minor
issues on this, such as calling children’s names prior to adults’ in
name-calling behavior but it seems not enough).

6.

[6] Gockley, R., Bruce, A., Forlizzi, L., Michalowski, M.,
Mundell, A., Rosenthal S., Sellner, B., Simmons, R., Snipes,
K., Schultz, Alan C., and Wang. J. “Designing Robots for
Long-Term Social Interaction,” IROS2005. pp 2199-2204
[7] Burgard, W., Cremers, A. B, Fox, D., Hähnel, D., Lakemeyer,
G., Schulz, D., Steiner, W., and Thrun, S. “The Interactive
Museum Tour-Guide Robot,” Proc. National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 1998.
[8] Siegwart, R., and et al. “Robox at Expo.02: A Large Scale
Installation of Personal Robots”. Robotics and Autonomous
Systems, 42, 203-222, 2003
[9] Imai, M., Ono T., Ishiguro, H.. Physical Relation and Expression: Joint Attention for Human-Robot Interaction,
Proceedings of the 10th IEEE International Workshop on
Robot and Human Communication (RO-MAN2001), pp.512517, 2001

CONCLUSION

We have developed an interactive robot system that combines
autonomous robots and ubiquitous sensors. The system guided
visitors through a science museum with human-like interaction,
such as calling their names in a free-play behavior and explaining
exhibits with voice and gestures. In a two-month exhibition,
91,107 people visited the Osaka Science Museum, 11,927 of
whom wore RFID tags to participate in the field trial. The results
from questionnaires revealed that almost all visitors evaluated
these robots highly. Furthermore, we investigated the influence of
the free-play interaction and guidance of the robots. As a result,
we found that the robots that performed childlike free-play
interaction and guided visitors were the best in attracting attention
to scientific explanations.

[10] Nomura, T., Tasaki, T., Kanda, T., Shiomi, M., Ishiguro, H.,
and Hagita, N. Questionnaire-Based Research on Opinions
of Visitors for Communication Robots at an Exhibition in
Japan, International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction (Interact 2005), 2005.
[11] Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Ono, T., Imai, M., and Mase, K.
``Multi-robot Cooperation for Human-Robot
Communication,'' IEEE International Workshop on Robot
and Human Communication (ROMAN2002), pp.271-276,
2002.
[12] Hayashi, K., Kanda, T., Miyashita, T., Ishiguro, H., and
Hagita, N. Robot Manzai - Robots' conversation as a passive
social medium-, IEEE International Conference on
Humanoid Robots (Humanoids2005), 2005.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We wish to thank the staff at the Osaka Science Museum for their
kind cooperation. We also wish to thank the following ATR
members for their helpful suggestions and cooperation: Tatsuya
Nomura, Hideaki Terauchi, Takugo Tasaki, Daniel Eaton,
Toshihiko Shibata, Koutarou Hayashi, Masaaki Kakio, Taichi
Tajika, and Fumitaka Yamaoka. This research was supported by
the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan.

[13] Koide, Y., Kanda, T., Sumi, Y., Kogure, K., and Ishiguro, H.
An Approach to Integrating an Interactive Guide Robot with
Ubiquitous Sensors, IROS2004, pp.2500-2505, 2004.
[14] Nabe, S., Kanda, T., Hiraki, K., Ishiguto, H. Kogure, K.,
Hagita, N.Analysis of Human Behavior in an Open Field to
Improve Communication Robots , HRI2006,(to appear)

312

