Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-019-04099-8
(0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().
,- volV)

HYBRID ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES

Lessons learned from longitudinal modeling of mobile-equipped
visitors in a complex museum
Francesco Piccialli1

•

Yuji Yoshimura2 • Paolo Benedusi3 • Carlo Ratti2 • Salvatore Cuomo4

Received: 3 December 2018 / Accepted: 12 February 2019 / Published online: 27 February 2019
Ó Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
Cultural sites are evolving toward smart environments, including the notion of hyper-connected museums. In this context,
stakeholders of cultural assets need more advanced and comprehensive ICT systems for monitoring and modeling visitors
behaviors. In this paper, we discuss the results of a longitudinal research study embracing multiple seasons, in a complex
cultural structure including outdoor and indoor attractions, multiple floors and multiple routes for visitors. Here, interactive
mobile devices were used for both offering multimedial context-aware assistance to visitors and monitoring services to
museum stakeholders. We deeply analyzed the data using an unsupervised classification approach, obtaining a model
where the number of distinct user profiles and the number of features were considered not trivial as well as not too complex
for museum stakeholders. We observed that some optimistic expectations about visitor performances were only partially
met, devising possible explanations in terms of the different user profiles and features of the model. Finally, we also
compared some outcomes from our interactive system with those obtained in another complex cultural structure using a
noninvasive monitoring system.
Keywords User behaviors  User modeling  Unsupervised classification  Data analysis  Data mining  Internet of things

1 Introduction
& Francesco Piccialli
francesco.piccialli@unina.it
Yuji Yoshimura
yyoshi@mit.edu
Paolo Benedusi
paolo.benedusi@databooz.com
Carlo Ratti
ratti@mit.edu
Salvatore Cuomo
salvatore.cuomo@unina.it
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Information
Technology, University of Naples Federico II, Via Claudio
21, 80125 Naples, Italy

2

SENSEable City Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology - MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
MA 02139, USA

3

Databooz Italia s.r.l., Centro Direzionale Via G.Porzio 4,
80143 Naples, Italy

4

Department of Mathematics and Applications ‘‘Renato
Caccioppoli’’, University of Naples Federico II, Via Cinthia,
80126 Naples, Italy

Visitors of cultural sites represent a peculiar class of users,
which pose multiple challenges for effective behavior
modeling; this is becoming more and more important for
both traditional museums and for technologically aided/
augmented versions of them. In spite of the widespread
availability of any kind of fixed and mobile devices, a
recent survey on international experiences of museums
observatories [1] revealed that systematic data collection is
almost exclusively based on ticketing and questionnaires.
These entail many limitations, including small size of
samples, reluctance of some people to answering, difficulties in ensuring proper randomization, time and cost of
interviews and low frequency of global investigations and
analyses (i.e., 2 times per year) [1]. Indeed, such questionnaires include information which can be gathered or
inferred, in great part, using technological devices: favorite
hours and length of the visit, activities performed during
the visit, preferred information channels used, types of
materials and information contents which were read or
listened. For this purpose, noninvasive systems exploit
devices which can track the presence and movements of

123

7786

visitors without any form of preregistration or explicit
provisioning of devices for identification and interaction.
As an alternative, interactive systems offer multiple types
of sensory experiences and services to the users, using
devices which also monitor and save information on user
positions, actions and timings. Each kind of system has its
own specific merits and limitations, while both allow for
continuous, massive, automated gathering and monitoring
of evidences, as well as for very frequent analysis (even
real time) and longitudinal studies. In this paper, we present a comprehensive user modeling method which can
embrace noninvasive, interactive and even mixed scenarios, where information gathered from multiple types of
passive and interactive devices can be combined. We
experimented this method in a cultural site representing
multiple options, opportunities and complexity factors
which can influence and shape user behaviors; these
include structural complexity (number of floors, rooms,
open and closed spaces, different routes and means for
physical movements such as scales or lift), richness/diversity of cultural attractions and technological sophistication of the multimedial interactive devices offered to the
visitors. At the same time, we strove for a model which
could be easy to understand and use by museum stakeholders and, more in general, promoters of cultural heritage
resources, in order to support decisions and check the
effectiveness of initiatives geared toward the improvement
of user engagement and the evolution of cultural offerings.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 discusses a summary of related work, Sect. 3 describes the
technology used for data collection and modeling, Sects. 4
and 5 present a methodology based on unsupervised techniques and related experimental results, while Sect. 6
highlights and discusses the main lessons learned from this
study, and Sect. 7 provides some conclusions and perspectives for further research.

2 Background and related work
Traditionally, visitor studies in museum have been conducted to analyze visitor‘s behavior and their spatial use,
based on the interview and observation at most cases [2].
They largely rely on the paper-and-pencil method, ‘‘timing
and tracking’’ [3]. The collected information is mapped and
examined to make a basic knowledge for the management
(e.g., the number of visitors, their visiting patterns),
including to measure attracting power, where it attracts the
visitors and holding power, which is the length of time
spent looking. Based on manually collected relatively
small-scale samples, it was proposed to classify the visiting
style of visitors [4–6]. The recently appearing emerging
technologies revolutionized the way of collecting the

123

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

behavioral data in museums and enable us to collect more
finer granular space and time resolution [7]. They are, for
example, RFIDs [8], bluetooth [9], or the combination of
other wearable devices (for example, see [10]). The collected data are used to classify visitors into the pre-established visiting types (i.e., the busy, selective and greedy) by
their path and length of stops [11], to predict the estimated
viewing times and the exhibited place to be interested for a
visitor, based on their previous location and viewed time
[12] and to validate the previously made classifications by
the quantitative data [13, 14]. They also enable us to
compare mathematical simulations of visit styles [14] with
the impacts of multimedial location-aware guides, showing
that visitors using such guides on their mobile devices tend
to extend the duration of their visits, while reducing the
social interactions among members of the same visitor
group [15]. In this perspective, authors in [16] propose an
interesting study on how visitors distribute their time
across artworks in a real case study (the CoBrA Museum of
Modem Art); the limited number of considered volunteered
visitors (180) limits the overall considerations and results
they propose. However, the gathered datasets have often
been still small-scale samples rather than longitudinal
neither dynamic nor fine grained. [9, 17] collected the
large-scale sample in the large-scale art museum (i.e.,
Louvre museum), showing the underlying patterns of visitors’ behaviors in terms of the path sequence and their
length of stay in the museum, but they did not classify the
visiting style in terms of visitors’ attributions nor apply the
clustering approach for that purpose.
At the technological level, in the last years, a handful of
different types of devices were experimented for detecting
and tracking the presence, flows and other behaviors of
visitors, including RFIDs, video cameras, sensors placed at
entry and exit points of rooms, microphones, personal
mobile devices, smart glasses and other wearable devices
[18]. This made it possible to compare mathematical simulations of visit styles [14] with the impacts of multimedial
location-aware guides, showing that visitors using such
guides on their mobile devices tend to extend the duration
of their visits, while reducing the social interactions among
members of the same visitor group [15]. Furthermore,
authors in [19] discuss a theoretical approach and
methodology to eye-tracking research and museum-interactive learning experiences. Particularly, promising
appears the noninvasive systems, which detect and follow
the media access control (MAC) addresses of personal WiFi and/or bluetooth devices commonly used by visitors,
including smartphones, earphones, smart swatches, bracelets and similar electronic tags [17, 20]. This paper proposes an unsupervised clustering approach to the largescale dataset of visitors’ behaviors in a complex museum
environment. In the rest of the paper, we will show the

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

7787

feasibility of the proposed classification approach for visitors’ visiting styles.

3 Data collection and modeling
In our experiments, we monitored a museum located inside
a castle named Castel Nuovo (also known as Maschio
Angioino), where artworks are distributed into multiple
rooms at multiple levels or floors (see Fig. 1).
From the Courtyard, visitors can reach the first floor by
either climbing the stairs or taking the lift, which also
provides access to the upper floors. Each bubble represents
an artwork (or group of artworks) for which our smart
museum equipment collected statistics; in particular, color
saturation and divergence represent a scale of temperatures
proportional to the number of visitors. The museum environment is equipped with IoT Beacon sensors; each sensor
is placed very close to an artwork (or a group of artworks)
and it emits a bluetooth low energy signal. A mobile
application named @art, deployed on many tablets, scans
the environment locating the Beacon sensors in its surrounding area.
Such tablets (see Fig. 2) provide two kind of services in
parallel: multimedial assistance to visitors in multiple
languages and monitoring for museum stakeholders. The
@art APP is location-aware; in that it identifies the beacons
in its neighborhoods, and each beacon has a unique identifier and local coordinates, which are whole numbers relative to the museum map. Based on these coordinates and a

Fig. 2 Some pictures of the @art mobile application and the deployed
bluetooth Beacon sensors within the Maschio Angioino castle

Fig. 1 The Maschio Angioino
castle map: the bubbles
represent the artworks position

123

7788

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

proximity algorithm, the APP determines the subset of
artworks which are closer to the visitor. Then, a list of
artwork icons and names is shown on the tablet screen, and
when the visitor selects one item, the APP proposes a set of
item-specific multimedial resources; the first picture of a
gallery, a short text and an audio file which starts playing
by default. The user can change the default language,
navigate the picture gallery, make the text invisible or
visible and use the most common commands of audio
players, i.e., stop, restart and move back and forth the slider
of the audio track. Each visitor may select the same artwork multiple times, either in sequence or by returning to
the same artwork after having selected other ones. The APP
saves records of all user actions in a log file, of which
Fig. 3 provides an excerpt, while Table 1 provides some
details on the artwork-related command codes.
At the beginning of each visit a new log file is issued,
while at the end it is transferred from the tablet to a central
file store, where each visit is uniquely identified by a
progressive, anonymous number. For the objectives of our
study, we analyzed only artwork-related commands in the
logs (Table 1), calculating statistics at two basic level of
aggregation: single artwork selection event and entire visit
of each person (Table 2)

4 Methodology
In order to detect and characterize different visitor profiles,
we analyzed the collected behaviors by using an unsupervised approach which is composed of three steps: (i) a data
value standardization process, (ii) a principal component
analysis (PCA) [21] and (iii) a k-means clustering algorithm [22]. For what concern the step (i), in order to
achieve a standardization of all potential features in the
collected behavioral data (see Table 2), we mapped the
values to fit the interval [0,1] by using a simple formula:
x ! x0 ¼

jx  xmax j
jxmax  xmin j

ð1Þ

where xmax and xmin are the maximum and the minimum
value, respectively. Then, regarding the step (ii), we

executed the PCA algorithm on these data. As we can
observe from the results in Fig. 4, only six features contributed more than the 10% to the composition of the first
principal component. Starting from this observation, we
considered only those six features as input for the next step.
In details, the six features showing an adequate predictive
potential are: nartw, elapsed, nfullaudio, nactartw, nfloors
and maxfloors. All the experiment where conducted on the
R framework [23].
Finally, focusing our attention on the step (iii), we had
to consider some key aspects related to the possible optimal
selection of the k value, as input for the k-means clustering
algorithm. As it is well known, it is still an open research
problem, and the notion of optimal should be restated as
more suitable or recommended with respect to the research
domain, the available data and the main goals of the Data
Analysis. For example, an evaluation function f(K) was
proposed by the authors in [24] to support the selection of
the k value; unfortunately, this approach entailed several
onerous re-calculations of a set of equations to find the
k value with an optimal evaluation. In our case, the k selection problem was supported by an extension of the R
framework named NBclust package [25]. This useful
package, given the dataset as input, provides the automated
calculation of many indexes used for determining the
number of clusters (the k value) to be selected as input for
the k-means algorithm.
In order to exploit these capabilities, and observing
the strategy in [24], we considered to balance the cost
and benefits of the k selection strategy depending on the
observations level of details; in particular, a dataset with
n objects could be grouped into any number of clusters
between 1 and n, which would correspond to the lowest
and the highest levels of detail, respectively. By specifying different values of k, it is possible to compare and
assess the results in terms of relationships among features and their variability at the intra-cluster and extracluster levels. Furthermore, by defining xi as the (p-dimensional) vector of objects of the cluster Ck and xk its
centroid, the within-group dispersion matrix can be
defined as follows:

Fig. 3 An excerpt of a log file generated by the deployed system during a visit. Each line corresponds to a visitor action with an associated
timestamp

123

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801
Table 1 The list of the artworkrelated commands available on
the mobile application

Type

7789

Command

Parameter values

Artwork

artwork_selected

Artwork title/id

Audio track

play_button_playing

False, true

Audio track

seektrack_at

position of slider in the audio file

Text guide

text_button

Invisible, visible

Photo

nextpic_photo

No.of photo/picture in the list

Photo

prevpic_photo

No.of photo/picture in the list

Table 2 A summary of the individual visit analyzed variables
Field

Content

LFilenum

Numeric identifier of the individual visit log.

LANG

Favorite language chosen in the tablet

mintimeArtw

Minimum timestamp of artwork selection in the entire visit

maxtimelog

Timestamp of the last action recorded in the visit log

elapsed
nartw

Time elapsed from the first artwork selection to the end of the tablet-based visit, measured in minutes
Distinct count of artworks visited

nactartw

Number of tablet-based actions performed by the visitor on artworks

nfloors

Distinct count of floors/levels of the building where at least one artwork was visited using the tablet

maxfloor

Maximum floor (numeric id) visited

minfloor

Minimum floor (numeric id) visited

nfullaudio

Distinct count of artworks whose audio files were played in full by the visitor

nactaudio_up

No.of actions which explicitly keep active the audio track (seektrack_at, play_button_playing=true)

nactaudio_stop

No.of actions which interrupt listening of the audio track (play_button_playing=false)

Audioinfull

Binary flag; 1= the audio track of the selected artwork was played in full

nactphoto

No.of actions on photos/pictures (nextpic_photo, prevpic_photo)

nacttext_visible

No.of actions with text_button = visible

nacttext_invisible

No.of actions with text_button = invisible

Fig. 4 The principal component
analysis results

123

7790

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

q X
X
Wq ¼
ðxi  xk ÞT ðxi  xk Þ

Pseudo  T 2 

ð2Þ



k¼1 iCk

where q 2 ð1; . . .; n  2Þ and n is the number of observation in the data matrix.
In our case, we have selected p ¼ 6, since each object
represents an individual visitor considering the six features
output of the step (ii), while n is the total number of visitors
stored in the dataset. By using the NBclust package, we
examined many indexes based on the Wq matrix, focusing
our attention on the following ones: TraceW, Hartigan,
Duda, Pseudo  T 2 and Beale, which are defined as
follows:

ð8Þ
–
Wm ðWk þWl Þ
Wk þWl

beale ¼ F  

ð3Þ

where the trace of an n-by-n square matrix W is defined
to be the sum of the elements on the main diagonal.
This iterative approach relies on increasing values of q,
until the difference between the results of two successive iterations maximizes its value and yields the recommended value of k.
–


hartigan ¼


traceðWq Þ
 1 ðn  q  1Þ
traceðWqþ1 Þ

ð4Þ

where the optimal number of clusters is the value of
q which maximizes the hartigan index;
–
duda ¼

Wl þ Wk
Wm

ð5Þ

S
where k, l and m are such that: Cm ¼ Ck Cl and the
optimal number of clusters is the minimum q for which:
vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ﬃ
u 
u2 1  8 2
t
pp
2
ð6Þ
z
duda ¼ 1 
pp
nm p
where z is the standard normal score, and the corresponding value of duda is named critValueduda; we
tested this criterion using various choices for z,
obtaining the best result from NBClust when the value
is set to 3.20. Then, we used the critValueduda for the
optimization of the Pseudo  T 2 index:
–
Pseudo  T 2 ¼

Bkl
Wk þWl
nk þnl 2

ð7Þ

where Bkl ¼ Wm  Wk  Wl and the optimal number of
clusters is the smallest q for which:

123



nm 1
nm 2

2

2p  1

ð9Þ

where F stands for a statistical test, in which the
statistic has an F-distribution under the null hypothesis.
The criterion consists in verifying whether an increase
ok the k value (i.e., from k  1 to k) entails a significant
reduction in the internal deviancy of groups, with relevant distances among the group centroids. This iterative approach is based on increasing the values of k. At
each iteration, it calculates a critical value with a Fisher
distribution having two degrees of freedom
Fp; ðNm  2Þp; the minimum value of F for which this
critical value is greater than a predefined parameter
(alphaBeale) determines the recommended value for
k. On our case, we adopted the default parameter value
(0.10).

–
TraceW ¼ traceðWÞ;


1  criticValueDuda
ðnk þ nl  2Þ
criticValueDuda

To further assess the k value selection, we also considered
the Marriot and Scott indexes [26], both based on the sum
of squares and cross products (SSCP) matrix. The SSCP
matrix consists of dependent variable sum of squares or
variances along the diagonal of the matrix and covariances
(cross products) on the off-diagonal elements that represent
the common variance shared between two variables [27]. In
detail, regarding the SSCP matrix, we have:
– the total sample matrix is: T ¼ X T X;
– if
X ¼ ðZ T ZÞ1 ; and Z is a cluster indicator matrix
ðn  qÞ with element :

zik ¼

1
0

i 2 Ck
altrimenti

then, the between-cluster matrix is B ¼ X T Z T ZX;
– finally, the within-cluster matrix is: W ¼ T  B
From this consideration, the indexes can be defined as
follows:
–
marriot ¼ k2 jWj

ð10Þ

This approach aims to evaluate up to which extent it is
convenient to increase the number of clusters, in terms
of decreasing intra-cluster variability and increasing

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

7791

inter-cluster distance. This iterative approach relies on
increasing values of k. At each iteration, it performs a
k-means clustering and calculates the difference
between two consecutive values of the marriott index;
when this difference reaches a maximum, the algorithm
yields the recommended value of k.
–
scott ¼ n  logðjTj=jWjÞ

ð11Þ

The algorithm iterates on increasing values of k; at
each iteration, it calculates the difference between two
consecutive values of the scott index; when this difference reaches a maximum, the algorithm yields the
recommended value of k.
The results obtained by executing the NBclust package,
related to the value calculation of the considered indexes,
suggest us a k value selection as summarized in Table 3.
manageable to museum stakeholders. The suggested k
value (number of clusters) can be considered as suitable with our aim to build a model conceived to be not
simplistic (as it would come from other kinds of indexes
suggesting k ¼ 2) as well as not too complex, and dealing
with five clusters of visitors appearing to be manageable
for the museum stakeholders.

5 Results
In this section, we summarize the basic characteristics of
the collected data and then, we present the final results of
clustering analysis with some considerations.

5.1 Characteristics of the collected data
In previous experimentations, we offered a promotional
version of the APP, which anyone could download for free
into their own smartphones; in addition, we offered to
visitors a limited number of complimentary APP-equipped
tablets. However, these experiences were concentrated in
isolated events, such as an exhibition located in a single
floor of a monumental building [28], which was monitored
for a limited time period. Subsequently, various improvements and simplifications were introduced in the @Art 2.0
version, and we decided to experiment a systematic/routine
offer of APP-equipped tablets at the entrance of a museum,
which visitors could rent paying a small charge in addition
to the museum ticket. Visitors who pay two fees represent
Table 3 The measured K-means
indexes and the suggested
number of clusters

the self-selection a special kind of population, which theoretically should be very motivated and interested in cultural heritage and related technological aids. In practice, it
was necessary to check and measure to which extent these
expectations were met, possibly distinguishing whether the
dominant interest was toward technology or art, or the
combination of both. We thus performed a longitudinal
study, analyzing data collected within a semester (May
16th–October 31st, 2017, a period of time which spans
over three seasons). The initial number of artworks selected
for monitoring was 164, but malfunctions of a beacon
during the months reduced the beacon-monitored artworks
to 160. In the following, visitors who rent and used the
tablet are named T_visitors, or even visitors as a shorthand.
Over the entire period, the number of T_visitors is 4719
and coincides with the number of log files.

5.2 Clustering results
We executed a 5-means algorithm in R including the six
features chosen with the PCA, obtaining the numeric
cluster profiles shown in Table 4.
In order to facilitate interpretation and understanding of
the numbers, we mapped them to nominal scales with
common labels such as low, medium, high. We had to
consider the fact that different features have different
density distributions of values and outliers, so that the same
numeric value may appear low in the context of one feature, and high in the context of another, as can be understood from the examples shown in Table 6.
As the values in Table 4 were obtained by mapping the
original values to the [0,1] interval, in Table 5 we used the
% symbol to emphasize that they represent percentages
with respect to the original intervals of values, which have
different orders of magnitudes and ranges for each feature.
In the case of nfloors (with possible original values 1, 2, 3,
4), the value at the 90th percentile equals the standardized
maximum (1.0), and it is quite far from the standardized
average (0.60). On the contrary, in the case of elapsed
(originally a continuum of values up to hundreds of minutes), the value at the 90th percentile (0.33) is very far from
the standardized maximum (due to a few rare outliers),
while it is closer to the average (0.21). For such reasons, we
can say that 0.33 has to be considered low in the context of
maxfloors and nfloors, while it has to be considered high in
the context of elapsed. Based on percentiles and averages,
we defined different thresholds for each feature and used

Marriot

Pseudo  T 2

Beale

TraceW

Hartigan

Duda

Scott

N  of clusters

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

Index value

88,994

2970,232

1032

13507,48

574,4661

34; 0339

0; 1192

123

7792

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

Table 4 The five clusters
(k ¼ 5) and the related features
values

cluster

maxfloor

nfloors

nartw

nfullaudio

nactartw

elapsed

population

%pop

1

1.00

0.99

0.33

0.30

0.14

0.33

651

13.80

2

0.02

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.07

201

4.26

3

1.00

0.90

0.13

0.10

0.07

0.22

1350

28.61

4

0.33

0.33

0.09

0.07

0.07

0.17

2081

44.10

5

0.70

0.62

0.10

0.09

0.07

0.20

436

9.24

4719

100.0

Total

Table 5 An analysis of the
features percentiles

avg%

90pct%

nfloors

0.60

1.00

nfullaudio

0.11

0.25

Elapsed

0.21

0.33

nacartw

0.08

0.15

them to map the numerical values to the labels of a common nominal scale, as shown in Table 6.
In this table, clusters are sorted by descending order of
population, and the corresponding profile nicknames are
used to synthesize the dominant aspects of each type of
behavior as follows:
– Moderate visitors (cl.4) perform limited movements in
space and limited T-based interactions with artworks,
with average length of stay in the museum;
– Wanderers (cl.3) tend to extend their physical movements in most or all floors, performing limited T-based
interactions, while spending more or less the same time
of moderate visitors;
– Strongly engaged visitors (cl.1) tend to cover all floors
and most artworks, exploiting in full tablet functionalities and devoting much time for such intense visit;
– Runners (cl.5) tend to cover a respectable number of
floors, but only skimming a limited number of artworks,
with corresponding limited T-based interactions
– Strangers (cl.2) seem some sort of outsiders, which
behave as if they were out of place (what am I doing
here?); they in fact tend to stay within the floor(s) at
lowest levels of the museum, visiting few artworks in a
short time.

5.3 Insights in clustering results
The populations of clusters reported as percentages in
Table 4 are referred to the total number of visitors in the
entire period of monitoring; as our longitudinal study
spanned over 5.5 months, we examined how the population
of each cluster is distributed in each month. According to
Fig. 5, the overall number of visits per month is quite
variable, while the breakdown into cluster populations by
month in Fig. 6 together with Fig. 7 reveals some
regularities.
It is evident that the dominance relationships among
cluster populations in the entire period (see Fig. 6) are
generally preserved in each month, except for a small
inversion between two clusters in October. The population
of moderates (cl. 4) remains the highest in each month,
followed by wanderers (cl. 3), strongly engaged (cl.1),
runners (cl.5) and strangers (cl.2), respecting the same
descending order of clusters in Table 4 until September.
However, as the overall population incurs relevant
variations by month, we studied the stacked histogram in
Fig. 7, where cluster populations are shown as percentages
of the monthly totals; this allows to observe that the percentages of each cluster skip up and down in different
months, as well as to observe that the differences between
the relative ratios of cluster populations have small fluctuations. Only in October, the population of strongly
engaged visitors (cl.1) falls below that of runners (cl.5), but
the order of magnitude of the corresponding variations is
not relevant with respect to the fluctuations affecting each
cluster in each month; thus, an isolated inversion between
two clusters having slight differences in their relative

Table 6 The Cluster-profile mappings with a nominal scale
cluster

Distinct artworks
selected

T-Actions on artworks

Listening: n. artworks
audio in full

Time: elapsed in visit

Space: inter-floors
movement

Profile nickname

4

Low

Low

Low

Medium

Low

Moderate

3

Low

Low

Low

Medium

High

Wanderer

1

High

High

Very high

High

Very high

Strongly engaged

5

Low

Low

Low

Medium

Medium

Runner

2

Very low

Very low

Very low

Very low

Very low

Stranger

123

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

Fig. 5 The overall number of collected visits by month

populations can be considered an occasional phenomenon.
As clusters are positioned in a space with six dimensions,
catching and assessing the relevance of specific aspects in
visitor profiles are not immediate; for this reason, we
examined projections onto some subspaces with few
dimensions at a time. For aspects concerning the extent of
physical movements in the museum, Fig. 8 demonstrates
that the total number of visits per floor diminishes or
remains stable as the floor level increases, while Fig. 9
reports the distribution of nfloors values in the population
of each cluster.
It is evident that wanderers (cl.4) tend to visit two distinct floors, and they account for the majority of the total
population. The value nfloors=4 occurs in almost all visitors of cluster 1 (strongly engaged), and also in a great part
of cluster 3 (wanderers). A minor but still relevant part of

7793

the same cluster 3 has nfloors=3, and the same happens for
the majority of visitors in cluster 5 (runners) and very few
visitors in cluster 1. The elapsed feature of our model
roughly corresponds to the length of stay in other papers,
where it is measured using different types of devices [17].
Investigations in this area include the possible influence of
the museum entry times; for example, it seems reasonable
to guess that visitors who enter in the museum in the early
morning have (or estimate to have) much time to spend,
thus expecting to observe higher lengths of stay than others, as well as higher propensity for tablet-based interactions. Similar guesses can hold for people initiating their
visit just after lunch time, while people initiating late in the
morning or late in the afternoon are expected to have lower
values in both elapsed and tablet-based interactions. In
order to check such assumptions, we studied the diagrams
reported in Figs. 10 and 11.
In Fig. 10, the x-axis reports Hour1stArtw, which comes
from the hour in the timestamp of the first T-based artwork
selection in a visit, while the y-axis reports the number of
visits which started in each hour band, as a percentage of
the total population monitored in the entire period. We
observe that there are up and down fluctuations, with peaks
around 11:00 and 16:00, with a local minimum around
lunch time (13:00), while only a minority of people initiated their visit in the last hour before the museums close
time or just at the opening time. In Fig. 11, we focus on the
average elapsed by entry hour, both in terms of absolute
values and as percentage of the grand total average (i.e., the
overall average on the total population in the entire period
of monitoring).
It is evident that starting from h.9:00 the average elapsed
time tends to diminish as the entry hour increases; the slope
is generally smooth and becomes steep only when the entry
time is within the last hour band. This pattern is consistent
with the results of a previous study conducted at Louvre, a
very complex and outstanding museum [17], where
behaviors were detected using a noninvasive system which
monitored the signals emitted by the personal bluetooth
devices of the visitors. In that case, it was verified that the
lengths of stay tend to decrease toward the closing hours of
the museum; the earlier a visitor enters the museum, the
longer that visitor tends to stay in the museum; so that the
time visitors enter can be used to predict visitor‘s lengths of
stay in the museum. In our case, the interactive multimedial assistance provided by tablets allowed to check and
confirm such kind of results obtained by noninvasive
devices, while providing additional value by distinguishing
among different visitor profiles and many insights on how
visitors spend their time.
In Fig. 12, for example, we report a breakdown of the
entry hour versus average elapsed relationships for each

123

7794

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

Fig. 6 The Cluster population
size by month

Fig. 7 The percentage of cluster
population by month

user profile; this reveals that the decrease in elapsed with
entry hour follows different patterns:
– only moderate visitors (cl. 4), which account for the
majority of the overall population, follow a definitely
decreasing trend in elapsed since h.10:00;
– strongly engaged visitors (cl. 1) keep their averages
within a range of high values, fluctuating up and down
until entry hour 15, with a remarkable decrease trend
only starting from h.16:00 and after;
– runners (cl. 5) and wanderers (cl. 3) follow fluctuating
patterns which appear quite similar to that of strongly
engaged, but staying within far lower elapsed ranges,
which keep slightly higher than those of moderates;

123

their elapsed decreases dramatically starting a little
later than others (h.17:00);
– strangers (cl. 2) have more erratic fluctuations in
elapsed, staying in any case at the lowest levels.
In addition to the length of stay, we studied how visitors
spend their time, by examining the tablet-based interactions with artworks (T-actions). According to the cluster
centroids in Table 4, the levels of artwork-related T-interactivity (nactartw) can be combined with different levels
of elapsed time, depending on the cluster; combinations of
high values in both elapsed time and T-interactivity occur
only in visitors of cluster 1 (strongly engaged). At the same
time, we observe that clusters having increasing values of

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

7795

Fig. 8 The percentage of the
number of visits by floor

Fig. 9 The number of logged
visits by cluster: breakdown of
the number of distinct floors
visited

nartw (the number of distinct artworks selected) also have
increasing values of nactartw (the corresponding number of
actions); in particular, cluster 1 includes visitors having
high values in both nartw and nactartw simultaneously. In
order to obtain more insights on such behaviors, we performed drill-down to the level of individual visitors of each
cluster. For example, in Fig. 13 each dot represents a visitor, labeled with a unique numeric identifier, while the
color indicates the corresponding cluster. This scatter diagram reports how the T-actions/distinct artworks ratio can
vary for different values of distinct artworks; logarithmic
scales are used in both x and y axes, mainly due to the large
range of values of nactartw. The dotted vertical and horizontal lines represent 90th percentiles of nartw and

nactartw, respectively, while the sloped black line represents a statistical trend line.
Here, it is evident that although the spread of values of
this ratio remains relevant among individuals, as nartw
increases the corresponding nactartw/nartw ratio tends to
decrease. In addition, the magnitude of the spread of values
is also different among clusters, and tends to diminish for
clusters with higher levels of engagement, particularly in
cluster 1. This means that strongly engaged visitors, for
visiting many more distinct artworks than others, also
perform many more T-actions in total, but it is very unlikely that they perform too many actions related to a single
artwork for all the visited artworks, otherwise this would
require either extreme lengths of stay or particularly

123

7796

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

Fig. 10 The percentage of
logged visits by entry hour
(considering the time of the first
artwork selection)

Fig. 11 The average visit elapsed times by entry hour

frenetic activity, which can occur for a few outliers. We
remark that at the individual visit level, a certain degree of
overlap between clusters is not a surprise, since a diagram
such as Fig. 13 represents a projection onto a 2D plane
from a six-dimensional space. This is just another way to
appreciate that although investigating variables in pairs is
very useful for highlighting specific trends and

123

relationships, all or most of the six variables identified with
the PCA remain necessary for characterizing visitor profiles. Interesting insights on the types of activities are
provided by nfullaudio, which accounts for the cases when
the visitor let the audio file to be played in full by the APP.
We can observe that the length of most audio tracks is
comprised between 1 and 2 min (see Table 7), while

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

7797

Fig. 12 The breakdown of
elapsed entry hour statistics by
cluster

Fig. 13 The scatter diagram of individual T-interactivity ratio versus no.of distinct artworks visited

skimming many photos requires very few seconds; hence,
we could expect that high values of the nfullaudio feature
characterize visitors who devote to artworks much more
time than other visitors, and their total elapsed time should
be higher as well. On the other hand, some visitors might
find audio tracks annoying (and also consider some human

Table 7 The lengths of audio
files expressed in minutes

average

90pct%

max

0.73

1.76

5.00

guides boring as well), so that they stop audio although
they still spend noticeable time for artworks, observing

123

7798

them visually and/or performing a relevant number of other
types of artwork-related T-actions, such as photo gallery
navigation and text reading. For this reason, we studied the
combinations of values of nfullaudio with nactphoto (see
Fig. 14).
In Fig. 14, beyond the threshold value of 35 related to
the nfullaudio feature, we can observe a wide spread of
combinations between the nactphoto and nfullaudio features, ranging from (nfullaudio low, nactphoto high) to
(nfullaudio high, nactphoto low); beyond this threshold, the
nfullaudio feature increases with minimal or no increase in
nactphoto (bottom-right area of the diagram), except for
some outliers. In very few cases, the nactphoto feature
appears dominant with respect to nfullaudio one (high-left
area of the diagram), while very high values of both
nfullaudio and nactphoto features can be found almost
exclusively within the cluster 1 (strongly engaged visitors).
These observations are consistent with the results obtained
from the PCA (see Fig. 4); although visitors can play high
quantities of actions on photos (thus confirming their
interest on this available option), the contribution of the
nactphoto feature to the first principal component is by far
less important than the nfullaudio and nactartw features,
which includes all types of actions related to artworks
(artwork selection, photo and text exploration, audio slider

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

seektrack/stop/up). One possible explanation for such
results is that artworks do not speak, while the primary
reason of a visit is seeing or touching them (for blind
persons). Hence, audio files provide a type of experience
that artworks cannot provide at all, while photos play an
important but ancillary augmentation of visual experience.
Photo galleries appear scanned in any visitor profile, while
only people having a sufficient level of motivation tend to
listen many audio files in full. This trend can be detected
since the first room including a relevant number of artworks (e.g., Charles V or Picture Gallery at Level1), hence
the nfullaudio feature is one of the most suitable candidates
for early predictions of engagement levels during the visit.

6 Main lessons learned
Studying a complex cultural setting for a long period of
time was essential to provide consistent support to the
representativeness and reliability of findings, which can be
grouped in three main areas: (i) affordability, meaningfulness and manageability of the user model, (ii) assumptions about users versus user expectations, (iii) comparison
and synergies between different systems for data collection
and analysis.

Fig. 14 The scatter diagram of photo gallery actions versus n.of audio files played in full

123

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

1. Affordability, meaningfulness and manageability of the
user model
In order to obtain relevant and meaningful visitor
profiles, adopting an unsupervised approach entails
benefits and risks, which are generally difficult to
balance; in particular, this occurs in the case of
k-means clustering, where the problem of selecting
optimal values for k is combined to that of selecting a
reasonable set of features having a convenient predictive power. We mitigated the risks by combining PCA
for feature selection with a set of multiple mathematical indexes, and by applying them to a large dataset
collected in a longitudinal study, embracing many
consecutive months of daily observations. We discovered that these indexes converged to the recommendation of a value for k (5), which also satisfied the human
need for a non-trivial but limited set of visitor profiles,
especially for the sake of museum stakeholders and
other related cultural heritage promoters. Even the
number of features (6) appeared not excessive to them,
although it was necessary to carefully map the numeric
values provided by R to suitable nominal scales for
making the model easy to understand. In terms of cost,
the proposed system appeared affordable, since it was
automated by combining common statistical packages
and business intelligence tools, which are easily
available both on desktop and web-cloud (R, MS
Power BI).
2. Assumptions about users versus user expectations
We checked the qualities of the resulting 5  6
visitor profiles matrix at different levels of detail,
comparing common assumptions with many types of
evidences and outcomes provided by this model. A
population of people paying for both the museum ticket
and an additional fee for an interactive device raised
optimistic expectations about their levels of interest
and performances, while our study demonstrated that
these were only partially met. Although this sample
represents the self-selection of visitors who pay more
for having some services, we ascertained relevant
diversities of behaviors inside this kind of population;
in particular, the features of the proposed five user
profiles resulted very useful to qualify and quantify
these diversities, revealing that only one profile has a
strong level of engagement in all aspects of the
proposed user experience, as well as profile with very
low performances all aspects. The other intermediate
profiles have different combinations of performances
in two or more aspects, which cover direct interest in
artworks, interest in contextual interactions with multimedial contents, propensity to ample movements in
the physical space (i.e., inter-floors) and length of stay
in the museum. In the area of multimedial assistance,

7799

on average, all kinds of multimedial contents (images,
text and audio files) have respectable frequencies of
selection, while only the propensity for playing
artwork-specific audio files results very relevant for
discriminating among user profiles, and it is one of the
most suitable candidates to be considered for early
predictions on individual behaviors. Apart from this
distinction, the quantity of interactions with the mobile
multimedial APP has a very wide range of variability
among visitors, as well as the average quantity of
T-actions per single artwork, but these indicators are
not directly correlated to the total elapsed time of visit;
visitors of some profiles tend to spend longer times
than others without increasing the quantity of T_actions. This extra time without interactions with the
APP could include pure observations of artworks,
pauses for other activities or slow movements between
rooms and floors which are caught by comparing
nfloors to elapsed time. The poor-performance profile
(strangers) could be explained by a combination of
multiple factors: subjective inconsistencies between
what people pay and their willingness to exploit it,
inadequate awareness of the nature of the (smart)
museum experience and insufficient availability of
time. Another hypothesis is the case of a large distance
between the expectations of some people about the
@art APP and its actual features; in principle, we
cannot exclude that this kind of APP resulted not
particularly exciting also for people of other profiles,
producing a certain impact on their performances.
3. Comparison and synergies between different systems
for data collection and analysis
In order to check the above assumption, it is
possible to integrate our system with user questionnaires, while improvements in user performances could
be expected by proposing them more fascinating
technologies, such as augmented reality and holograms
in the museum. Even in such perspectives, the results
obtained in our study can be used as a reference and
well-defined term of comparison, in order to assess in
which areas and to which extent improvements will be
actually achieved. In this respect, we observe that our
model is suitable for comparisons with results obtained
using different types of data collection and monitoring
systems. In particular, we compared our results about
the elapsed time of visitors with a study on the length
of stay in a very complex and outstanding museum (the
Louvre), based on the noninvasive monitoring of
personal bluetooth devices of visitors [17]. In particular, we ascertained that the time spent for interacting
with an APP such as @art can influence the absolute
values of the total length of stay, whose range also
depends on many characteristics of the specific

123

7800

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801

museum (size, quantity of attractions, means and routes
for physical movements, etc.), but we found that some
patterns are very similar in both scenarios. In particular, our study confirms that the lengths of stay tend to
decrease toward the closing hours of the museum, as
well as that the earlier a visitor enters the museum, the
longer that visitor tends to stay in the museum. On the
other hand, the rates of decrease starting from early
entry times toward late entry times are different in the
two studies, and the breakdown of diagrams at cluster
level shows that different user profiles have significant
differences in multiple aspects: the ranges of length of
stay, the slope of the lines, the presence and magnitude
of up and down fluctuations. This level of detail on
elapsed time was obtained thanks to the functionalities
of our interactive APP, which was also indispensable
for investigating how visitors spend their time. For the
sake of monitoring, we realized that noninvasive
systems and interactive systems should not be treated
as mutually exclusive, but rather used in synergic
ways. A noninvasive system based on widespread
personal devices catches many visitors who do not rent
any device offered by the museum, and has no impact
on their behaviors. An interactive system provided by
the museum is conceived for impacting the behaviors
of visitors by purpose, but mainly in terms of quality of
experience rather than quantity; it catches visitors
which are attracted by mobile interactive facilities,
although the actual motivation and levels of engagement may be very variable among individuals. A
certain area of overlap exists between these two
systems, in that an interactive system can check and
confirm some types of patterns observed with a
noninvasive system, while providing more insights
and added value on more aspects of visitor behaviors.
In the perspective of a multi-technology, synergic
approach, we remark that the proposed six-dimensional
model is both inclusive and flexible, since it includes
the features that can be monitored using noninvasive
systems as well other features which are typical of
interactive systems.

visitor profiles, which can be the targets of distinct strategies and specific programs for improvement, evolution and
promotion of museum experiences. The noticeable variability of some features of individual behaviors, which we
observed also inside each cluster, can also be seen as a
source of opportunities, since it allows to estimate that
some individuals within a profile could easily switch to
another more performance profile, in response to new
proposals or well-focused improvements and evolutions of
existing ones. For such purposes, museum stakeholders can
consider different kinds of initiatives: hosting new types of
artistic installations and new kinds of exhibitions at the
museum premises; opening new rooms to visitors; changes
in the disposition of artworks; improvements in the facilities for visitors movements, provision of internet connectivity, and advances in technological devices for enriching
the visitor knowledge and interactions with artworks. One
promising road is the evolution of APPs for offering more
and more personalized recommendation during the visit.
However, the objective should not be to maximize interactions with all sorts of technological devices for each
second of entire visit, otherwise physical visits to museum
premises could be entirely substituted by remote virtual
ones. Should brick and mortar museums continue to exist,
technology must never overwhelm artworks. Future works
will be focused on (i) improving the k selection strategy,
(ii) classifying the visitors behavior considering their
physical movements/path within the space.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the OPS-REMIAM
project [Grant Number PON03PE_00161] and the Cultural Equipment with Transmedial Recommendation Analytics - C.E.T.R.A.
project [Regione Campania - Bando RIS3 2018 - Fase 2 - Supporto di
progetti, anche collaborativi, di sviluppo precompetitivo, trasferimento tecnologico da parte delle MPMI campane]

Compliance with ethical standards
Informed consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual
participants included in the study.
Conflict of interest The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest.

References
7 Conclusions and future work
We experimented a totally unsupervised approach for
obtaining visitor profiles from a numerous population of
visitors in a wide period of time, which is not influenced by
the characteristics of preconceived models coming from
sociological theories or other qualitative empirical observations. The proposed system has the capability to identify
and quantify a limited but significant number of different

123

1. Bollo A (2016) Il monitoraggio e la valutazione dei pubblici dei
musei. Gli Osservatori dei musei nellesperienza internazionale,
Quaderni della Valorizzazione Nuova Serie, 2, Direzione Generale Valorizzazione-Mibact
2. Hooper-Greenhill E (2006) Studying visitors. In: Macdonald S
(ed) Companion to museum studies. Blackwell Publishing,
Oxford, pp 362–376
3. Yalowitz SS, Bronnenkant K (2009) Timing and tracking:
unlocking visitor behavior. Visit Stud 12(1):47–64

Neural Computing and Applications (2020) 32:7785–7801
4. Veron E, Levasseur M (1989) Ethnographie de l’exposition :
l’espace, le corps et le sens, Centres Georges Pompidou
5. Dean D (1994) Museum exhibition theory and practice. Routledge, London (ISBN 978- 020-3039-366)
6. Serrel B (1996) Exhibit labels: an interpretive approach. Alta
Mira Press, xv, Walnut Creek, p 261 (ISBN 07-619-9106-9)
7. Mygind L, Bentsen P (2017) Reviewing automated sensor-based
visitor tracking studies: beyond traditional observational methods? Visit Stud 20(2):202–217
8. Kanda T, Shiomi M, Perrin L, Nomura T, Ishiguro H, Hagita N
(2008) Analysis of people trajectories with ubiquitous sensors in
a science museum. In: IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation, 2007. IEEE, pp 48464853
9. Yoshimura Yuji, Sobolevsky Stanislav, Ratti Carlo, Girardin
Fabien, Carrascal Juan Pablo, Blat Josep, Sinatra Roberta (2014)
An analysis of visitors’ behavior in the Louvre museum: a study
using bluetooth data. Environ Plan B Plan Design
41(6):1113–1131
10. Kirchberg V, Martin T (2015) The museum experience: mapping
the experience of fine art. Curator Mus J 55(2):169–193
11. Sparacino F (2002) The Museum Wearable: real-time sensordriven understanding of visitors’ nterests for personalized visually-augmented museum experiences. In: Proceedings of Museums and the Web, pp 17–20
12. Bohnert F, Zukerman I, Berkovskt S, Baldwin T, Sonenberg L
(2008) Using interest and transition models to predict visitor
locations in museums. AI Commun 21:195202
13. Zancanaro M, Kuflik T, Boger Z, Goren-Bar D, Goldwasser D
(2007) Analyzing museum visitors behavior patterns. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference, on User Modeling
(UM), pp 238246
14. Sookhanaphibarn K, Thawonmas R (2009) A movement data
analysis and synthesis tool for museum visitors behaviors, in:
PCM 2009, in: LNCS, Vol 5879, pp 144–154
15. Bello-Orgaz JJ, Jung D (2016) Camacho, social big data: recent
achievements and new challenges. Inf Fusion 28:4559
16. Martella C, Miraglia A, Frost Jeana, Cattani M, van Steen M
(2017) Visualizing, clustering, and predicting the behavior of
museum visitors. Pervasive Mob Comput 38(2):430–443

7801
17. Yoshimura Y, Krebs A, Ratti C (2017) Non invasive bluetooth
monitoring of visitors length of stay at the Louvre. IEEE Pervasive Comput 16(2):26–33
18. Brancati N, Caggianese G, Frucci M, Gallo L, Neroni P (2015)
Touchless target selection techniques for wearable augmented
reality systems, Intell Interact Multimedia Syst Serv, pp 1–9
19. Rainoldi M, Neuhofer B, Joos M (2018) Mobile eyetracking of
museum learning experiences, information and communication
technologies in tourism. In: Information and Communication
Technologies in Tourism, pp 473–485
20. Abedi N, Bhaskar A, Chung E (2014) Tracking spatio-temporal
movement of human in terms of space utilization using mediaaccess-control address data. Appl Geogr 51:72–81
21. Abdi H, Williams LJ (2010) Principal component analysis, wires.
Comput Stat. https://doi.org/10.1002/wics.101
22. Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J (2009) The elements of statistical learning data mining. Springer, Berlin
23. Chambers JM (2008) Software for data analysis: programming
with R. Springer, Berlin
24. Pham DT, Dimov SS, Nguyen CD (2005) Selection of K in
K-means clustering. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part C J Mech Eng Sci
1989–1996
219(1):103–119.
https://doi.org/10.1243/
095440605X8298
25. Charrad M, Ghazzali N, Boiteau V, Niknafs A (2014) NbClust:
an R package for determining the relevant number of clusters in a
data set. J Stat Softw 61(6):1–36
26. Scott AJ, Symons MJ (1971) Clustering methods based on likelihood ratio criteria. Biometrics 27(2):387397
27. Weinfurt KP (1995) Multivariate analysis of variance. In: Grimm
LG, Yarnold PR (eds) Reading and understanding multivariate
statistics. American Psychological Association, Washington
28. Chianese A, Marulli F, Piccialli F, Benedusi P, Jung JE (2017)
An associative engines based approach supporting collaborative
analytics in the internet of cultural things. Future Gener Comput
Syst 66:187–198
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

123

Neural Computing & Applications is a copyright of Springer, 2020. All Rights Reserved.

