Modelling Museum Visitors’ Quality of Experience
Eirini Eleni Tsiropoulou

Athina Thanou

Symeon Papavassiliou

Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering and Institute for Systems
Research
University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA
eetsirop@isr.umd.edu

School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
athinathanou@central.ntua.gr

School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
papavass@mail.ntua.gr

Abstract—This paper introduces a holistic approach in the
formulation and optimization of museum visitors’ Quality of
Experience (QoE). The most influential parameters on visitors
QoE have been identified and quantified via performing an
empirical study based on a questionnaire answered by experts in
the field of arts and museums. Individual QoE functions with
respect to each of the identified parameters have been formulated
for different museum visitors’ style, towards capturing visitors’
perceived satisfaction in a formal manner and providing them a
customized and personalized experience. Visitors’ total QoE
function is formulated considering the different weight of the
parameters and optimized in order to determine the optimal
conditions that maximize museum visitors’ satisfaction. Detailed
numerical results are provided towards illustrating the
applicability of the proposed framework under different
scenarios.
Keywords—Quality of Experience; modelling and optimization;
perceived satisfaction; museum visitors’ styles.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The visit of a museum is a dynamic, multi-variable,
personalized and sensitive experience. Visitors’ perceived
satisfaction can be affected by numerous factors, such as
visual, audio, architectural characteristics. The proper
consideration and formulation of those factors in wellstructured expressions / functions reflecting museum visitors’
Quality of Experience (QoE) is of high importance in order to
understand, predict and optimize visitors’ QoE. Visitors’ QoE
optimization can provide significant benefits in the following
directions: (a) improve visitors’ satisfaction, (b) engage
visitors to repeat visiting and recommend their experience to
others, i.e. word-to-mouth advertisement [1] and (c) provide
input to museum managers towards fine-tuning museum’s
services and improve museum’s visibility and brand loyalty.
User behavior modeling and user satisfaction capturing, in a
formal and exploitable manner, is critical in designing and
delivering services where personalization, adaptation and
recommendation become of paramount importance towards
providing people more customized, and immersive experience.
Several research works that have studied museum visitors’
perceived satisfaction [2], [3], have argued on one hand about
the absence of a “typical museum visitor” and on the other
hand about the fact that visitors’ satisfaction can be affected
either by common or personalized factors. Veron and
Levasseur [4] identified four visiting styles in a primarily
978-1-5090-5246-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

qualitative research work, based on visitors’ movement in the
physical space of museum. Zancanaro et. al [5] tried to
complement Veron’s and Levasseur’s research work by
providing empirical evidence and a quantitative validation of
the aforementioned qualitative theory. In [6] museum visitors’
behavior is studied towards evaluating the impact of
exhibitions on visitors’ satisfaction. Rojas et. al [7] introduced
a research work relating visitors’ emotions with the
corresponding QoE. The majority of these works have mainly
emphasized on the sociocultural aspect of museum visitors’
QoE. A first attempt to formulate museum visitors’ QoE in
mathematical functions was proposed in [8] considering
visitor’s distance from the exhibit and his / her stop over time
to the exhibit. Authors’ goal was visitors’ classification in the
four visiting styles proposed in [4]. Lykourentzou et. al [9]
further studied the effect of smart routing and intelligent
recommendations on improving museums visitors’ QoE.
II.

PAPER CONTRIBUTION & OUTLINE

However, despite the attention that museum visitor’s QoE
has recently attracted, to the best of our knowledge there is
still lack of a holistic framework, where the parameters that
influence and determine visitors’ QoE can be clearly
identified, quantified, and more importantly formulated in
different QoE functions with respect to the visiting styles [4]
towards improving museum visitors’ perceived experience.
Our research work and study aims exactly at filling this gap.
Specifically, the basic characteristics, contributions and
differences of our proposed framework can be summarized as
follows:
1. We introduce a modeling based holistic approach
regarding the formulation and treatment of museums visitors’
QoE. The main parameters that influence museums visitors’
QoE have been identified via a detailed questionnaire
answered by experts in the field of arts and museums, e.g.
museum directors, gallery organizers, etc. (Section III.A). The
aforementioned parameters have been related and tailored to
the four visiting styles proposed in [4] (Section III.B).
2. Different QoE functions depending on each parameter are
formulated for each distinct visiting style. The mathematical
formulation of visitors’ individual QoE functions, showing
and quantifying the dependence of visitors’ QoE with respect
to each of the most influential parameters, is one of the main
novelties in the proposed framework (Section IV). Based on
such a formulation a wide range of QoE-aware or QoE-driven

International Association of Art-Critics-Greek [13], the
Acropolis Museum, the National Art Gallery and Alexander

related personalized services may be designed, e.g. smart
guidance, etc.
3. Based on the statistical analysis of experts’ questionnaire’s
answers, different weights have been empirically determined
for the parameters that mainly influence visitors’ QoE. Thus, a
holistic museum visitors’ QoE modeling in appropriate
functions differentiated per visiting style has been performed
considering simultaneously all the examined parameters, as
well as their corresponding weights. An optimization problem
of the total QoE function is formulated and solved determining
the optimal values of the most influential parameters towards
maximizing visitor’s QoE (Section V).
4. A quantitative analysis of the total QoE function is also
performed under two realistic use case scenarios applying the
proposed framework and presenting detailed numerical results
(Section VI).
Finally, Section VII concludes the paper and discusses
future directions.
III.

Fig. 1. Imprortance weight of each QoE parameter

Soutzos Museum, the Museum of Byzantine Culture, etc.
Overall, fifty (50) detailed evaluations were provided and
collected by experts, while the study lasted for two months.
The statistical analysis of the results enabled us to determine
the weight of each parameter within the overall QoE function,
as it is presented in Fig. 1.

METHODOLOGY TOWARDS DESIGNING QOE FUNCTIONS

B. Visiting Styles Modelling & Description
Museum visitors’ QoE is affected based on their preferences
and habits. Towards studying visitors’ QoE, a common
strategy is to classify them in clusters. Veron and Levasseur
[4] have performed an anthropological research and have
concluded to four types of visiting styles via analyzing
visitors’ movement in the physical space of a museum.
Visitors are classified in four animal metaphors clusters: ant,
fish, grasshopper and butterfly. The animal metaphors stem
from visitors’ natural movement, which can be translated to
specific visitors’ preferences and interests.
The ant visitors are interested to visit all exhibits, thus they
follow a linear path walking close to exhibits and showing
interest in the detail. They avoid empty spaces and especially
room centers. Ant visitors are in favor of having a facilitator
providing information about the exhibits. On the other hand,
the fish visitors visit more often the center of the rooms, they
prefer the non-crowded spaces and they want to have the
“larger” picture of all the exhibits in the museum’s room.
Therefore, they avoid going close to the exhibits, they do not
stop by each exhibit and they do not desire to spend much
time (i.e. complete presentation) with a facilitator.
The grasshopper visitors have clear preferences and they
are interested in specific exhibits that they visit in close
distance and spend time to observe them, while they do not
visit the rest of the exhibits. They already know a lot of
information about the exhibits that they decide to visit. They
are used to cross empty spaces, e.g. center of the museum
room, in order to visit the targeted exhibits and they do not
stop by the exhibits very often. Finally, the butterfly visitors
are also interested in almost all exhibits in the museum,
however they spend different time to observe each exhibit.
Given that they do not have specific interests / priority in
exhibits, they often change the direction of their movement,
they move close to the exhibits, they see almost all the
exhibits in the museum and they have a close look on the
exhibit’s details. The butterfly visitors have an autonomous
behavior, thus they have limited interest in following a

A. Questionnaire to Experts
Towards relating the physical parameters to visitors’
perceived Quality of Experience, five main parameters have
been identified as detailed and documented in the literature
[4], [8] - [10]. In the following, the five main parameters are
presented and let V and E denote the set of museum visitors
and exhibits, respectively.
1. d [m]: distance between exhibit ε ∈ E and visitor v ∈ V ,
2. d e [m]: distance between two sequential exhibits ε ,ε ′ ∈ E ,
3. ρ [visitors/m2]: crowd density,
4. t f [min]: time spent with facilitator providing useful
information to the visitors about the exhibits,
5. S [m2]: exhibition size.
It is noted that the aforementioned parameters do not
influence visitor’s QoE in the same manner and with equal
weight. Therefore, we have developed a questionnaire
addressed to experts (e.g. archeologists, museum and gallery
directors, etc.) towards determining the importance of each
parameter, as well as obtaining some critical values of these
parameters in order to design at a second step the QoE
functions (Section IV). The questionnaire consists of a set of
14 questions and has been carefully designed in order to
quantify the experts’ perception and knowledge [11]. The
questionnaire was distributed either physically or via Google
Forms, where the latter provides a user friendly interface. At
the first part of the questionnaire, the expert was authorized
and some indicative demographic information was collected in
order to justify his/her expertise. Afterwards, some more
visitors’ QoE oriented questions are included, i.e. optimal
distance between visitor and exhibit and between two
sequential exhibits, etc. Finally the experts had the option to
express the importance of each parameter in a five point scale.
The questionnaire [11] was circulated to several relevant
associations/forums and individual museums, including the
International Council of Museums (ICOM) [12], the

78

facilitator and they are strongly affected by the crowd density,
which influences them to change their visiting path.

C. Crowd Density
All style visitors’ QoE is decreased when crowd density is
increased. Specifically, fish visitors’ QoE is more affected by
increased crowd density, because they are standing in the
center of the museum room and the increased crowd, blocks
their visual contact with the exhibits. On the other hand, ant
visitors have a priori decided to visit all exhibits in the
museum room, thus the high congestion of visitors does not
discourage them significantly from visiting the exhibits. Thus,
visitors’ QoE relation with respect to the crowd density ρ can
be formulated as in (9) (see Table I).

IV. INDIVIDUAL VISITOR’S QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE
As described in Section III.A, our initial goal in this work is
to formulate appropriate QoE functions, and at a second step
optimize visitor’s total QoE function towards determining the
optimal values of the influential parameters that maximize
museum visitors’ perceived satisfaction. In the following,
individual QoE functions are formulated for each type of
visiting style considering each of the aforementioned
parameters in Section III.A. This analysis enables us to better
express the relations among the influential parameters and
visitors’ QoE, as well as reveal the main differences of the
various visiting styles with respect to the QoE. It is noted that
all the numerical values considered in the following analysis
are derived from the experts’ answers to the questionnaire [11]
and are presented in detail later in Table I.

D. Time Spent with Facilitator
The useful information provided by a facilitator to the
visitors enables them to have a better understanding of the
exhibit they observe. Thus, as the time spent with facilitator
increases, visitors’ perceived experience increases, while their
QoE is maximized for a specific time interval for ant, butterfly
and grasshopper visitors, who are more interested in listening
to more explanatory information in contrast to the fish visitors,
who are more interested in just observing the exhibit.
However, for all styles of visitors their QoE decreases if the
time spent with facilitator exceeds a specific threshold. The
relation among visitors’ QoE and time spent with facilitator tf
can be formulated as in equations (10) – (11) (see Table I).

A. Distance between Exhibit and Visitor
Considering visitors’ perceived QoE with respect to the
distance d (m) between exhibit ε ∈ E and visitor v ∈ V , it is
differentiated based on the size (s) of the exhibit ε , i.e. small
or big. Based on the experts’ answers [11], a small exhibit is
of dimensions approximately 45 cm x 35 cm, while a big
exhibit is approximately 1.5m x 1m. The ant (A), butterfly (B)
and grasshopper (G) visitors’ QoE is analogously improved
with respect to their distance from the exhibit, while there is a
specific distance interval where they perceive the maximum
satisfaction. After that point as they get away from the exhibit
their QoE decreases, because they cannot observe its details.
Considering the fish (F) visitors, they are used to stand at the
center of the room and observe the exhibits without being very
interested in the details. Thus, their QoE is maximum for
small values of their distance from the exhibit, while when
they become more distant from it (for considerably greater
values than the rest of the three styles of visitors), their QoE
decreases rapidly, simply because they are not able to have the
clear picture of the exhibit. The aforementioned observations
are depicted in the QoE functions (1) – (4), and are presented
in Table I.

E. Exhibition Size
The size of an exhibition affects visitors’ QoE. As the
exhibition’s size increases, visitors’ QoE increases, due to the
fact that more exhibits are exposed to the visitors. However, if
exhibition size is relatively large compared to visitors’
willingness to walk, their QoE decreases because they become
physically exhausted. Thus, visitors’ QoE with respect to
exhibition’s size can be formulated as in equation (12).

V. TOTAL QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE MODELING FOR
MUSEUM’S VISITORS
In this section, a total QoE function considering the
individual relations of visitors’ QoE with respect to the
aforementioned parameters, is formulated. Each parameter
contributes in a different manner to the overall visitors’ QoE.
The weight wi ( i = d , d e , ρ , t f , S ) of each parameter within the

B. Distance between Two Sequential Exhibits
All type of visitors are dissatisfied when exhibits are
extremely congested, i.e. close distance between sequential
exhibits, because they are “bombarded” by information. Also,
visitors’ QoE is decreased when exhibits are sparsely located,
due to the fact that visitors have the feeling that the exhibition
is not rich in terms of content, as well as because they have to
walk a lot in order to observe a satisfactory number of exhibits
(especially in the case of ant style visitors who visit in a linear
path all exhibits in the museum’s room). However, there is an
optimal distance interval between sequential exhibits, where
visitors perceive exhibits’ reflected information in an optimal
manner and they are not physically exhausted to visit the
preferred exhibits. Thus, visitors’ QoE with respect to the
distance de between two sequential exhibits can be formulated
as in equations (5) – (8) (see Table I).

overall QoE function is calculated based on experts’ answers
to the circulated questionnaire, as presented in Section III.A.
The values of the weights have been normalized,
thus 0 ≤ wi ≤ 1 . Thus, the visitors’ total QoE function per each
type of visiting style can be expressed as the normalized
weighted summation of the individual QoE functions.
QoEx ( i = d , d e , ρ , t f , S ) =
 wd QoEx ( d ( s ) ) + wde QoEx ( d e ( s ) ) +



 wρ QoEx ( ρ ) + wt f QoEx ( t f ) + wS QoEx ( S ) 



(13)

wd + wde + wρ + wt f + wS
where QoEx denotes the total QoE of each type of visitor (i.e.
x=A, B, G, F).

79

TABLE I.

INDIVIDUAL QOE FUNCTIONS & PARAMETERS (EQUATIONS (1) – (12))

No

Equation

Parameters
Values

(1)

 1
d ( s)
, 0  d ( s ) ≤ d opt1, sm.

 dopt1, sm.

QoE ( d ( s = Small ) ) = 1
, dopt1, sm.  d ( s )  dopt 2, sm.
A, B , G

d zeroPo int, sm.
1
−
⋅ d ( s) +
, d opt 2, sm. ≤ d ( s ) ≤ d zeroPo int, sm.
 d zeroPo int, sm. − d opt 2, sm.
d zeroPo int, sm. − d opt 2, sm.


d opt1, sm. = 0.5

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

 1
d (s)
,0  d ( s ) ≤ dopt1,big

 dopt1,big

QoE ( d ( s = Big ) ) = 1
,dopt1,big  d ( s )  dopt 2,big
A, B , G

d zeroPo int,big
1
−
⋅ d (s) +
,dopt 2,big ≤ d ( s ) ≤ d zeroPo int,big
 d zeroPo int,big − d opt 2,big
d zeroPo int,big − d opt 2,big


d opt 2, sm. = 1.5
d zeroPo int, sm. = 4

d opt1,big = 1.5
d opt 2,big = 2.5
d zeroPo int,big = 7

d ( s ) − dopt ,sm , F


1

, 0  d ( s ) ≤ dopt , sm, F

QoE ( d ( s = Small ) ) =  QoElow, F 2 
F
 d (s)
,d ( s ) ≥ d opt , sm, F
ba

QoElow, F = 0.3

d ( s ) − dopt ,big, F


1

, 0  d ( s ) ≤ dopt ,big , F

 QoElow, F 
QoE ( d ( s = Big ) ) = 
F
2
1
2

d ( s ) ,d opt ,big , F ≤ d ( s ) ≤ d zeroPo int,big , F
 d ( s )  +
− d 2
d opt ,big , F
 opt ,big , F

d opt ,big, F = 5

1
2

⋅ de ( s ) ,
0  d e ( s ) ≤ d e,opt1, sm.
2
d
,
1,
.
e
opt
sm


QoE ( d e ( s = Small ) ) = 1,
d e,opt1, sm.  d e ( s )  d e ,opt 2, sm.
B ,G , F

2
d ⋅ d e ( s ) + e ⋅ d e ( s ) + f , d e ( s ) ≥ d e,opt 2, sm.

1
2

⋅ de ( s )
,0  d e ( s ) ≤ d e, opt1,big
2
d
,
1,big
e
opt


QoE ( d e ( s = Big ) ) = 1
,d e,opt1,big  d e ( s )  d e,opt 2,big
B ,G , F

2
, d e ( s ) ≥ d e,opt 2,big
 g ⋅ de ( s ) + h ⋅ de ( s ) + i

1
2

⋅ de ( s )
, 0  d e ( s ) ≤ d e, opt1, sm.
2
d
,
1,
.
e
opt
sm


QoE ( d e ( s = Small ) ) = 1
, d e,opt1, sm.  d e ( s )  d e,opt 2, sm.
A

2
 j ⋅ d e ( s ) + k ⋅ d e ( s ) + l , d e ( s ) ≥ d e,opt 2, sm.


d e , opt1, sm. = 0.5

80

d opt , sm , F = 2.5

a = 0.52, b = 5

d zeroPo int,big , F = 10

d e , opt 2, sm. = 0.7

d = −1.56
e = 2.19
f = 0.23
d e , opt1,big = 1.4
d e , opt 2,big = 1.7

g = −0.59
h = 2.01
i = −0.71
d e , opt1, sm. = 0.3
d e , opt 2, sm. = 0.4

j = −2.78
k = 2.22
l = 0.56

/

(8)

1
2

⋅ de ( s )
, 0  d e ( s ) ≤ d e,opt1,bigA
d2
,
1,bigA
e
opt


QoE ( d e ( s = Big ) ) = 1
, d e,opt1,bigA  d e ( s )  d e,opt 2,bigA
A

2
m ⋅ d e ( s ) + n ⋅ d e ( s ) + o , d e ( s ) ≥ d e, opt 2,bigA


(9)

QoE ( ρ )

(10)

d e , opt1,bigA = 0.9
d e , opt 2,bigA = 1.2

m = −0.31
n = 0.74
o = 0.56
QoElow− level = 0.2

( QoElow − level ) ρ , Fish

1
ρ

CrDe
= QoElow − level B ,G , But . / Gras .

1
ρ
CrDe A
QoE
, Ant
−
low
level


CrDeB ,G = 1.5

CrDeA = 2.5



2
,0  t f ≤ t f , opt1
− p ⋅ t f + q ⋅ t f

QoE ( t f ) = 1
, t f , opt1  t f  t f , opt 2
A, B , G

t f ,max
1
−
,t
⋅t +
≤ t ≤ t f ,max
 t f ,max − t f , opt 2 f t f ,max − t f , opt 2 f , opt 2 f


p = 0.25, q = 1
t f , opt1 = 2, t f , opt 2 = 3

t f ,max = 5

(11)

,0  t f  t f ,opt
t f
QoE ( t f ) = 
2
F
r ⋅ t f + s ⋅ t f +t ,t f ,opt ≤ t f ≤ t f ,max

t f , opt = 1, t f ,max = 2
r = 1, t=-s=4

(12)

u ⋅ v S ,0  S ≤ Sopt1

QoE ( S ) = 1
,Sopt1  S  Sopt 2
A, B ,G , F

S
 w ⋅ x ,S ≥ S opt 2

u = 0,19 , v = 1.19
w = 2.38, x = 0.94
S opt1 = 9, Sopt 2 = 14

Based on this observation and assuming that the parameters
which are related to museum deployment (i.e. de and S)
remain constant, we study two use case scenarios. For
demonstration purposes only, in both scenarios the size of the
exhibits is assumed small, however, similar analysis can be
provided for big exhibits as well.
In Scenario A, visitors’ total QoE is studied as a function of
the distance of the visitor from the exhibit for increasing
crowd density. This scenario mainly reflects museum
directors’ perspective and interest. On the other hand, in
Scenario B the visitors’ perspective is considered via studying
visitors’ total QoE with respect to the crowd density for
various cases of time spent with facilitator. Based on this
scenario, the visitors are able to select the most appropriate
duration of listening to the facilitator given the existing crowd
density towards optimizing their QoE.
Scenario A
Fig. 2 illustrates visitors’ total QoE as a function of the
distance d of the visitor from the exhibit, as it is formulated in
equation (13) for different indicative values of crowd density
(while tf=1.2min, de=0.6m2). Considering the ant, butterfly
and grasshopper visitors’ total QoE, the results reveal that as
visitors’ distance from the exhibit increases up to 0.5m, their
total QoE increases rapidly, while it is maximized for
distances between 0.5m and 1.5m and if they become more
distant from the exhibit (i.e. d>1.5m) their satisfaction
decreases, while for extremely large values of distance, i.e.
d>4m, their total QoE remains stable at the lowest point. This

Our goal is to determine the optimal conditions (values), i.e.
d , d e , ρ , t f , S , such that visitors’ overall QoE is maximized.

Therefore, the following optimization problem is formulated
as a maximization problem.
max QoEx ( i = d , d e , ρ , t f , S ) 
d , de , ρ , t f , S 
s.t. d min  d  d max , d e ,min  d e  d e ,max

(14)

ρ min  ρ  ρ max , t f ,min  t f  t f ,max , S min  S  Smax
The above optimization problem can be easily solved and
determine the global maximum ( d * , d e* , ρ * , t f * , S * ) =

arg max QoEx ( i = d , d e , ρ , t f , S ) via multivariable calculus,

i.e. via determining the critical points, calculating the Hessian
matrix and its determinants. The vector ( d * , d e* , ρ * , t f * , S * )
reflects the optimal values of d , d e , ρ , t f , S such that visitor’s
QoE is maximized.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we provide some numerical results
illustrating the operational features of the proposed
framework. As it is observed in Fig. 1, the key parameters that
significantly influence visitors’ perceived QoE are: (a) the
distance d [m] between exhibit ε ∈ E and visitor v ∈ V
(wd=0.635), (b) the crowd density ρ [visitors/m2] (wρ=0.89)
and (c) the time spent with facilitator tf [min] ( wt f = 0.665 ).

81

observation stems from the fact that as they stand too close to
the exhibit, they are unable to perceive its whole picture and
as they become more distant they are not able to observe the
details. Considering fish visitors, their QoE is relatively low
when they stand close to the exhibit and increases roughly as
they move to the center of the room. Similarly, their total QoE
decreases rapidly for large values of the distance from the
exhibit.
Scenario B
Fig. 3 illustrates visitors’ total QoE as a function of the
crowd density for different values of the time spent with
facilitator tf (while d=2.5m, de=0.6m). Fish visitors are
affected the most because they stand at the center of the room,
thus even a small obstacle may block them from viewing the
exhibit. Ant visitors’ total QoE presents a steady decrease
with respect to the crowd density, thus they are not affected
that much by the co-existing crowd, due to their willingness to
wait to approach all exhibits. Butterfly and grasshopper
visitors are patient and afford the existence of the crowd
towards observing the exhibit, thus their total QoE decreases
more smoothly compared to fish visitors’ total QoE with
respect to the crowd density. Additionally, the results reveal
that ant, grasshopper and butterfly visitors, in contrast to fish
style visitors, experience higher levels of total QoE when they
spend more time with facilitator, due to the fact that they are
interested to obtain useful information about the exhibit.
Specifically, ant, grasshopper and butterfly visitors’ total QoE
is maximized when the time spent with facilitator is 1.5min,
while the corresponding time for fish visitors is 1min.

Fig. 2. Visitors total QoE as a function of d [m] for different crowd densities

Fig. 3. Visitors total QoE as a function of crowd denisty [visitors/m2] for
different time spent with facilitator scenarios

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

[4]

The main goal of this paper is to identify the most
influential parameters on museum visitors’ QoE and formulate
representative QoE functions capturing visitors’ satisfaction.
An empirical estimation (i.e. questionnaire to experts) of the
most influential parameters and of some realistic values of
them, in order to properly formulate the QoE functions, is
presented. Individual QoE functions with respect to each
parameter for the four museum visitors’ styles (i.e. fish, ant,
grasshopper and butterfly) have been formulated in order to
define the relation of visitors’ perceived satisfaction with
respect to the most influential parameters. Further, the total
QoE function with respect to all parameters has been
introduced considering the weight of each parameter as it was
empirically derived. The optimization problem of maximizing
visitors’ total QoE has been formulated and solved, while
detailed numerical results were provided for two
representative use case scenarios.
Our current and future research plans include the execution
of real experimentation with actual museum visitors in order
to validate the proposed framework and its applicability under
realistic conditions. Finally, based on such a framework
efficient and effective QoE-driven intelligent and personalized
guidance/routing approaches may be developed.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

82

P. Harrison, and R. Shaw, “Consumer satisfaction and postpurchase ntentions: An exploratory study of museum visitors,”
Intern. Journal of Arts Management, 6(2), pp. 23–33, 2004.
L. Chittaro, and L. Ieronutti, “A Visual Tool for Tracing Users’
Behavior in Virtual Environments,” Proceedings of the AVI’04,
pp. 40-47, 2004.
P. Wright, “The Quality of Visitors’ Experience in art
Museums” in P. Vergo, The New Museology, Reaktion Books,
2006.
E. Veron, and M. Levasseur, “Ethnographie de l'exposition,”
Bibliothèque Publique d'Information, Centre Georges
Pompidou, 1983.
M. Zancanaro, T. Kuflik, Z. Boger, D. Goren-Bar, D.
Goldwasser, “Analyzing Museum Visitors’ Behavior Patterns,”
User Modeling, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4511,
pp 238-246, 2007.
C. Goulding, “The museum environment and the visitor
experience,” European Journal of Marketing, vol. 34(3/4), pp.
261–278, 2000.
Carmen de Rojas, and C. Camarero, “Visitors’ experience,
mood and satisfaction in a heritage context: Evidence from an
interpretation center,” Tourism Management, vol. 29, issue 3,
pp. 525-537, 2008.
K. Sookhanaphibarn, and R. Thawonmas, “A Movement Data
Analysis and Synthesis Tool for Museum Visitors' Behaviors,”
in Proceedings of the 10th Pacific Rim Conference on
Multimedia: Advances in Multimedia Information Processing,
Springer-Verlag, 2009.
I. Lykourentzou, X. Claude, Y. Naudet, E. Tobias, A. Antoniou,
G. Lepouras, and C. Vasilakis, “Improving museum visitors'
Quality of Experience through intelligent recommendations: A
visiting style-based approach,” 9th International Conference on
Intelligent Environments, pp. 507 – 518, 2013.
K. Sookhanaphibarn, and R. Thawonmas, “Visualization and
Analysis of Visiting Styles in 3D Virtual Museums,” Digital
Humanities, pp. 1-6, 2010.
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1TcSlbPyw6clTpYKEyuWKCK88ltdLSbYLoS677JQjTE/edit?usp=sharing
(in Greek)
http://icom.museum/
http://www.aica-hellas.org/el

