Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Library & Information Science Research

Museum Web search behavior of special interest visitors
Mette Skov a,⁎, Peter Ingwersen b
a
b

Aalborg University, Department of Communication and Psychology, Nyhavnsgade 14, 9000 Aalborg, Denmark
Royal School of Library and Information Science, University of Copenhagen, Birketinget 6, 2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Available online 20 May 2014

a b s t r a c t
There is a current trend to make museum collections widely accessible by digitising cultural heritage collections
for the Internet. The present study takes a user perspective and explores the characteristics of online museum
visitors' web search behaviour. A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods was deployed in a case
study at a National Museum of Military History. Quantitatively, data from a web questionnaire survey and a
user study of interactive searching behaviour were collected and analysed. Qualitatively, observation protocols
were coded and analysed based on inductive content analysis. It was found that metadata elements on factual
object related information, provenience, and historic context was indicated to be relevant by the majority of
the respondents, characterising the group of special interest museum visitors as information hungry. Further,
four main characteristics of online museum visitors' searching behaviour were identiﬁed: (a) searching
behaviour has a strong visual aspect, (b) topical searching is predominantly exploratory, (c) users apply broad
known item searches, and (d) meaning making is central to the search process.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
A current trend is to make museum collections widely accessible by
digitising cultural heritage collections for the Internet, building on the
idea of the visitor-centred museum (Anderson, 2004). Online visits to
museum websites have become popular and some museums report
that the number of online museum visitors exceeds the number of
visitors to the physical museum (e.g., Fantoni, Stein, & Bowman,
2012). This raises the question of how visitors search, use, and interact
with online museum collections.
2. Problem statement
Even though extensive literature examines visitor behaviour in the
physical museum (e.g., Black, 2005; Falk & Dierking, 2000; Semper,
1998), studies of museum web site visitors have primarily focused on
demographic characteristics, user segmentation, and technical details
of the visit taking a quantitative departure. In response, there has lately
been a call for a user-centred approach to the study of how digital
museum resources are used, as well as a call for increased studies of a
wider variety of users (Ellenbogen, Falk, & Goldman, 2008; Jörgensen,
2004; Marty, 2007, 2008). Motivated by this call, the present case
study takes a user perspective and explores the characteristics of online
museum visitors’ information searching behaviour. The case study adds
to understanding of why online museum collections are used; but the
study primarily explores how users interact with online museum
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: skov@hum.aau.dk (M. Skov).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2013.11.004
0740-8188/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

collections. The focus is on what Booth (1998a) denotes as special
interest museum visitors and the following research questions guided
the study:
• What characterises information searching behaviour of special
interest online museum visitors?
• What characterises visitor motivation?
• How do different task types affect search attributes and search
strategies?
Improved understanding of how special interest online museum
visitors interact with online collections can inform interaction design
and contribute to making museum collections both useful and useable.

3. Literature review
3.1. Visitor motivation
Extensive literature examines visitor motivation and behaviour
in the physical museum. Lately, the importance of extending the
notion of museum visitation to also to cover visits to museum web
sites before or after the visit to the physical museum has been
stressed (e.g., Kravchyna & Hastings, 2002; Marty, 2008). Research
on museum visitor motivation is an important point of departure
when aiming to strengthen our understanding of museum visitor information searching behaviour. Visitor motivation and intentionality are
elements of the cultural and social context inﬂuencing how visitors
search and interact with online museum resources.

92

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

In 1998, Booth (1998a,b) reported an extensive study of information
needs of both on-site and remote access visitors at the Science Museum
in London. Booth (1998a) identiﬁed a need for a variety of facilities,
including remote access facilities to assist in planning an upcoming
visit, to browse galleries and acquire object-related information
Goldman and Schaller’s (2004) literature review on the most common
motivations from web site visits validates Booth’s (1998a) ﬁndings
and lists the following motivational categories:
• Gathering information for planning an upcoming visit to the physical
museum (opening hours, admissions, etc.);
• Self-motivated research for speciﬁc content information;
• Assigned research (school or job assignments) for speciﬁc content
information; and
• Engage in casual browsing.
Recently, a ﬁfth motive, “make a transaction on the website,” has
been added by Fantoni et al. (2012). Several studies show that planning
an upcoming visit to the physical museum is the most frequently
mentioned motivation for visiting a museum web site (Booth, 1998a;
Goldman & Schaller, 2004; Marty, 2007). However, the present study’s
target group was, in line with Goldman and Schaller (2004), individuals
who look at museum web sites for a content-based reason. This target
group was chosen in an attempt to exclude the large number of people
planning an upcoming visit. Using Booth’s (1998a) terminology, user
study participants in the present study were special interest museum
visitors pursuing a long-standing interest or hobby (Skov, 2009). From
an information-searching perspective, this information-intensive user
group is of particular interest.
The concept of meaning making provides an additional approach to
understanding museum visitor experience and motivation (Falk &
Dierking, 2000; Silverman, 1995; Weil, 2002), stressing the museum
visitor’s active role in creating meaning from museum objects and exhibitions. Objects displayed in an online exhibition or collection database
do not, themselves, represent facts nor do they have any ﬁxed or inherent meaning. Therefore, online, museum visitors’ interaction with and
understanding of a museum object relies on the individual. Meaning
making, or the process by which those objects acquire meaning for individual members of the public, will in each case “involve the speciﬁc
memories, expertise, viewpoint, assumptions and connections that the
particular brings” (Weil, 2002, p. 212). Silverman (1995) further adds
to an understanding of meaning-making in the context of a museum experience by stating that “visitors ‘make meaning’ through a constant
process of remembering and connecting.... In museums, people attempt
to place what they encounter – be it text, object, fact, perspective –
within the context of their experience” (p. 162). The concept of meaning
making was explored in an online museum context (Goldman &
Schaller, 2004). However, the results regarding meaning making
remained too diverse to provide useful correlations, suggesting that
other data collection methods than questionnaire surveys are needed.
3.2. Related studies of museum visitors’ web search behaviour
Understanding online museum visitor behaviour is critical to the development of relevant and useful museum web sites. Until now, studies
of how online visitors search and interact with digital museum resources remain few and scattered. A notable exception is the work by
Marty (2007, 2008, 2011), who, in a series of surveys, explored aspects
of visitor behaviour with the aim to help museum professionals better
understand how new information technologies have changed the way
museum visitors approach museums and their resources. Based on a
questionnaire survey, Marty explored the museum website in the life
of the visitor and showed how “online museum visitors have speciﬁc,
and different, needs and expectations of museum websites before and
after museum visits” (Marty, 2007, p. 356). Marty’s (2007, 2008)
study further indicates a positive correlation between online and inperson visits, supporting the theory that virtual museums encourage

physical museum visitation, which is also pointed to in related studies
(Fantoni et al., 2012; Goldman & Schaller, 2004; Kravchyna &
Hastings, 2002). In a later survey, Marty (2011) found users of personal
digital museum collection systems to be object focused and motivated
by a desire to create lists of objects and images online. A similar
object-centred perspective was found in Kravchyna and Hastings
(2002). Taking an information-seeking point of view, they found that
63% of online visitors would like to go beyond marketing information
and search museum collection databases. In continuation, the authors
stressed the importance of providing end users with historical context
information as a frame of reference to understand individual museum
objects.
Previous research on access to museum websites has improved our
knowledge of user demographics, motivation, and expectations of visits,
providing a better understanding of how to support different user
needs. Additionally, there are more technical aspects of creating access
to digitized museum collections using emerging technologies (Styliani,
Fotis, Kostas, & Petros, 2009); however, they are not included here as
they do not take a user perspective. The review of related studies
shows that questionnaire surveys are the predominant data collection
method applied. While questionnaire surveys have proven useful to
describe why online museum collections are used and by whom, they
have limitations of low response rates (Goldman & Schaller, 2004;
Marty, 2007, 2008) and low explanatory power as to how users interact
with rich museum content such as collection-related information.
4. Methodology
The research design was directed by two primary concerns: the involvement of real users and systems in real-life situations; and relating
ﬁndings of information searching behaviour to system design and representation of museum artefacts. Both aspects are grounded in
Ingwersen and Järvelin’s (2005) integrated framework for information
seeking and retrieval, which served as the theoretical frame for the
study.
4.1. The Military Museum
The case study was carried out in the context of the National
Museum of Military History (the Military Museum) in Copenhagen,
Denmark. The Military Museum is a museum of cultural history, covering the history of the Danish defence and development of weapons from
the introduction of ﬁrearms to the present day. The heterogeneous
collections of approximately 200,000 museum objects cover a variety
of media. As part of the Military Museum’s digitisation strategy, online
access is provided to a part of the collections on their website (www.
thm-online.dk). At the time of this study the collection database covered a unique sub-collection of 1,705 museum artefacts illustrating
the development of primarily hand weapons. The collection database
can be accessed by browsing through historical eras or doing an analytical facet search. A record including a textual description, metadata, and
digital images represents each museum artefact. In addition, highresolution digital images of original registration materials are attached
to each record (see Fig. 1).
4.2. Web questionnaire survey
The web questionnaire survey served two purposes. First, it provided initial information about online museum visitors’ areas of interests,
purposes of visiting the museum Website, and preferred data elements,
as well as demographic data. Second, it recruited participants to the
succeeding user study. The questionnaire was published on the Military
Museum’s Web site and, in addition, advertised in a relevant newsgroup
and a printed journal. The questionnaire consisted of closed, pre-coded
questions in combination with a few open-ended questions. The online
questionnaire was administered over two months from February 2008

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

93

Note:
A = Textual description of museum artefact
B = Metadata
C = Digital image (zoomable)
D = High resolution digital images of original registration materials
Fig. 1. Example record from the Military Museum’s collection database.

to April 2008. A total of 153 respondents completed the questionnaire.
This study focused on the 132 respondents who visited the Military
Museum’s website in connection with their hobby or leisure interest
area. The remaining 21 surveys were discarded, as respondents visited
the Web site in a study, school, or work context and were thus not
regarded as part of the target population. Respondents were aged between 16 and 72 with an average age of 46 and a median age of
45 years. Only two respondents were women, which was not surprising
given the coverage of the museum. The majority of the respondents had
either “some experience” or were “highly experienced” in relation to
their hobby or interest area (see Table 1).
The response rate was difﬁcult to calculate, as it was tricky to determine the size of the target population. However, an estimation of response rate was calculated based on visitor numbers from Google
analytics software. According to Google analytics, 1897 unique visitors

visited the Military Museum’s collection database during the twomonth period, resulting in an estimated response rate of 8%. This is a
quite low response rate, which is an often-discussed disadvantage of
Web surveys (Zhang, 2000, p. 59). Further, the use of online questionnaires with a self-selected sample has limitations due to difﬁculties in
obtaining a random sample and, accordingly, the present study does

Table 1
Survey respondents’ knowledge level (N = 132).
Knowledge level in relation to hobby or interest area

#

%

I have some experience and background knowledge
I’m highly experienced and have extensive background knowledge
I’m a novice with little knowledge within this area
I don’t know

76
40
14
2

57.6
30.3
10.6
1.5

94

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

not claim representativeness. A self-selected sample method was
chosen as it was seen as the only possible way to reach the group of
elusive online museum visitors. This is especially the case in the present
study, as it aimed to go beyond web survey as data the collection
method.
4.3. User study of interactive searching behaviour
The web questionnaire survey was followed by a user study in order
to explore how online museum visitors search and interact with the
museum collection database. Twenty-four participants were recruited
through the web questionnaire. All subjects were men, aged between
32 and 72 with an average age of 49. The majority (20) of the user
study sessions took place in an ofﬁce at the Military Museum’s administration building, two sessions took place in participants’ private homes,
and the last two were conducted at participants’ places of work.
Building on Borlund’s (2000) evaluation framework for interactive information retrieval systems, search tests based on simulated search
task situations were conducted. Four simulated search tasks were
designed, inspired by real life information needs reﬂected in written
enquiries from the public to the museum. They are described below
and the full wording of task A is shown in Fig. 2:
• Task A reﬂects a well-deﬁned topical information need: Participants
were asked to decide on the use of a purchased powder horn based
on an enclosed photograph of the “purchased” powder horn.
• Task B reﬂects a data element search: Participants were asked to identify names of gun makers from the town of Odense and information on
their weapons.
• Task C reﬂects an ill-deﬁned topical information need, a broad and
semantically open task: Participants were asked to ﬁnd information
related to the Second World War.
• Task D reﬂects a combined known item and data element search task:
Participants were speciﬁcally asked to ﬁnd information on a Colt Navy
revolver seen in the museum’s exhibition (known item) and to verify
whether the museum has more Colt Navy revolvers (known data
element).
In line with other studies using simulated search task situations
(Borlund, 2000; Tombros, Ruthven, & Jose, 2005), participants were
instructed to retrieve as many useful documents as it would take to
satisfy their information need. In total, 96 search tasks were concluded.
During the search sessions, desktop activities including mouse
movements were recorded using the Morae software tool version 2.0.
A retrospective talk-aloud session took place immediately after a participant completed the simulated search session. Validity of retrospective
talk-aloud protocols depends much on the stimuli participants get to
help them recall their thoughts (Van den Haak, de Jong, & Schellens,
2003). Therefore, participants were exposed to a recording of the search
process they went through, as recommended by Van den Haak et al.
(2003) and Ingwersen (1982). During the retrospective talk-aloud
sessions, participants were asked to comment and explain on their
search sessions in order to obtain verbalised, explanatory information
on the search process. The recorded video clips were subsequently

examined and information was extracted in relation to search
attributes. The comparison of various search attributes aimed to verify
how different task types affect search attributes and search strategies.
A one-way ANOVA test (level of signiﬁcance of 0.05) was carried out according to the following overall hypotheses in order to analyse differences among the four search tasks in relation to the above listed
search attributes:
Ho. no difference exists between the different types of search tasks
Ha. difference exists between the different types of search tasks
A post hoc multiple comparisons test (the LSD test) was used to examine patterns of differences. Like the web questionnaire, recruitment
of participants to the user study was also based on a self-selected
sample. Therefore statistics were applied in order to explore the quantitative data and support the qualitative data analysis. User study participants’ verbal comments during the retrospective talk-aloud sessions,
together with observation notes from the search sessions, were
analysed using the ATLAS.ti qualitative data analysis software. A coding
scheme was developed with the research questions as a starting point.
The text material was coded by the ﬁrst author based on an inductive
content analysis.

5. Findings
5.1. Visitor motivation
The ﬁrst step to characterise information searching behaviour of online museum visitors addressed what initiates online museum visitors’
search for information. Table 2 shows survey respondents’ purposes
for visiting the Military Museum’s collection database. Respondents
were allowed to indicate more than one purpose of visit. On average,
each respondent indicated 2.7 purposes for an online museum visit.
The answers indicate the two most frequent purposes were to ﬁnd
“information on a speciﬁc type of museum object” and “a photograph
or illustration.” Less common were broader, topical related purposes
like “general knowledge on defence history” and “knowledge on the
museums collections.”
In continuation of the question of purpose of visit, respondents in
the web survey were asked whether they found what they were looking
for on the Military Museum’s website. Table 3 shows that 29.5% of the
respondents were not looking for anything speciﬁc. This is an interesting
ﬁnding indicating an exploratory searching behaviour. It supports that
leisure tasks and derived information needs of online museum visitors
are not necessarily initiated by a problem but, rather, driven by interest.
Together, Tables 2 and 3 show the variety of enquiries and reveal that
the majority of information needs related to speciﬁc types of objects;
whereas topical information needs and visits related to broader-level
knowledge on defence and military history in general were less
frequent. Further, Tables 2 and 3 show that the majority of information
needs were speciﬁc (e.g., speciﬁc type of museum object, photo, or
illustration; or speciﬁc museum object) and that the majority of respondents found or partially found what they were looking for.

Task A: Powder horn
You went to the flea market last weekend and by coincidence you found an old powder horn. You
bought the powder horn and was told that it had been used in connection with hunting. However,
one of your friends is certain it was used in the military. Now you are looking for different types
of powder horns to try to decide on its use.

Note: A photograph of the ‘purchased’ powder horn was shown to the use study participant.
Fig. 2. Simulated search task A.

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98
Table 2
Survey respondents’ purposes for visiting the Military Museum’s collection database
(N = 132).
Purpose of visit to the Military Museum’s collection database

#

%

Find information on a speciﬁc type of museum object
Find a photograph or illustration
To gain knowledge of the museum’s collections
To gain knowledge of defence and military history in general
Find information on a speciﬁc museum object
Plan a visit to the museum
Find links and references to literature
Other
I don't know

80
66
59
54
47
28
18
7
2

61.5
50.8
45.4
41.5
36.2
21.5
13.8
5.4
1.5

Respondents emphasized the visual, non-textual aspect of
searching behaviour and online museum collections and, accordingly,
“photograph of object” was the most-often indicated data element.
Almost 90% of respondents said that “photograph of object” was a relevant data element in a searchable record of a museum object. Table 4
shows frequencies for each of the 14 data elements listed in the web
questionnaire. Respondents were allowed to indicate more than one
answer. In addition to “photograph of object,” other factual, objectrelated information like “production year” and “physical description
and measurements of the object,” together with information on
“when was the object used,” were rated relevant data elements. Very
few museum studies provide comparable information on the data
element level. An exception is Booth’s (1998a) study that also found
factual information and purpose of object to be key object-based
information. In general, respondents in the present study indicated a
broad range of data elements and were information-hungry, as each
respondent on average indicated 7.3 data elements as relevant. In the
context of the present study information-hungry can be deﬁned as
how participants are highly eager to search for, browse through, and
read object related information. Observations from the search tasks
exemplify how participants are interested in a broad range of data
elements, are willing to accept high recall, and are willing to spend
time deciphering handwritten registration material.
5.2. How task type affects search attributes and search strategy
In order to investigate how different task types affect search
attributes and search strategy, the 96 search tasks were coded on six
quantitative search attribute dimensions and two search strategy
dimensions shown in Table 5. For example, the attributes concerning
task A were that on average each participant:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

spent 04:58 minutes to complete the task;
viewed 29.71 items in the search result list (without opening);
viewed (opened) 2.04 records;
viewed 0.71 digital photographs;
used the zoom function 0.42 times;
viewed digital images of registration material 0.79 times; and
made 1.42 search iterations.

Further, the main search strategy applied in task A was free text
searching combined with direct browsing (using Marchionini’s (1995)
terminology) by scanning of search results.
Table 3
Survey respondents’ expectations of online visit (N = 132).
Did you ﬁnd what you were looking for on
the Military Museum’s Web site?

#

%

I found what I was looking for
I was not looking for anything speciﬁc
I found some of what I was looking for
I didn't ﬁnd what I was looking for
I don’t know

52
39
34
5
2

39.4
29.5
25.8
3.8
1.5

95

Table 4
Preferred data elements in a searchable record of museum objects (N = 132).
What type of information on a museum object is relevant to you?
Factual, object related information:
Production year
Physical description and measurements of the object
Type of object
Country of production
Visual:
Digital photograph of object
Provenience:
When was the object used
Who owned and/or used the object
In which countries was the object used
Associated historic context information:
In which historic events was the object used
Historic information on periods or events associated to the object
Other:
Long prose description of the object
References to further information on the object
Short prose description of the object
Other
I don’t know

#

%

91
86
68
68

68.9
65.2
51.5
51.5

118

89.4

86
65
65

65.2
49.2
49.2

70
46

53.0
34.8

75
73
38
15
2

56.8
55.3
28.8
11.4
1.5

In order to explore the quantitative data, the differences among the
four search tasks in relation to the selected search attributes were
analysed by variance analysis (ANOVA) using SPSS. A one-way ANOVA
test (p b 0.05) was carried out. Results of the ANOVA test show a strong
association between task type and number of items viewed in the
search result list. The post hoc multiple comparisons test (the LSD
test) showed that the number of items viewed in the search result list
was signiﬁcantly lower in task B than the other three tasks. This is not
surprising, as task B represented a known data element search and
most participants searched for the name of the town “Odense” resulting
in a result comprising only 7 items.
A weaker association was found between task type and the following
three attributes: average search time, average number of digital images
of registration material viewed, and average number of search iterations.
First, concerning average search time, participants spent signiﬁcantly
more time on the semantically open and ill-deﬁned search task C than
the other three tasks. Even though participants spent a longer time on
this task, they did not open signiﬁcantly more records than in the other
tasks. Task C is a good example of how participants heavily browsed
the search result lists and used the thumbnail images of photographs
to assist them in gaining an overview of the results. For example,
participant J spent 8 1/2 minutes on task C and opened only a single
record. The results indicate an association between task and average
search time: more time is spent on semantically open topical search
tasks.
Second, on average, less registration material was viewed during
search task A (powder horn) than in the other tasks. The digital image
of original registration material contains additional information on
physical object description, provenience, etc. However, the answer to
task A can be found without consulting the registration material,
which explains the low number of average material viewed in this
task. Third, participants made fewer search iterations in task C and D
than in task A and B. As explained below, the main search strategy
applied in task C was browsing and, hence, a low number of search
iterations were to be expected in this task. In task D most participants
applied a single search term resulting in few search iterations. Overall,
the ﬁndings correspond to previous results concerning end-user
searching: end-user searchers still make simple, short queries with
few free-text search terms and little use of advanced features
(Markey, 2007). The statistical tests showed no patterns of differences
concerning task types and the following three attributes: number of
records viewed, number of digital photographs viewed, and number
of times zoom function used. Consequently, the null-hypothesis
concerning these three attributes cannot be rejected.

96

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

Table 5
How type of search task affects search attributes and search strategy (n = 24).
Search attributes of simulated search tasks:

Task A
Powder horn

Task B
Gun makers

Task C
2nd WW

Task D
Colt

Average search time (minutes)
Items viewed in the search result list (average)
Museum records viewed (average)
Digital photographs viewed (average)
Use of zoom function (average)
Digital images of registration material viewed (average)
Search iterations (average)
Search strategy:
Main search strategy applied:
Type of browsing:

04:58
29.71
2.04
0.71
0.42
0.79
1.42

05:07
10.29
3.58
0.38
0.17
2.21
1.38

07:31
28.88
2.88
1.25
0.54
1.75
0.58

05:31
29.54
2.33
0.83
0.25
1.63
0.79

Free text searching
Directed browsing
of search results

Free text searching
Directed browsing
of search results

Browse historical periods
Semi-directed browsing

Free text searching
Directed browsing
of search results

A clear association was found between search strategy and type of
information need. In the three simulated search tasks representing
well-deﬁned information needs (tasks A, B, and D) the main search
strategy applied was free text searching. Especially in task D (Colt
Navy) free text searching was combined with use of the drop-down
menus to limit the query by “country of production” or “object type.”
In these three tasks participants also used a directed browsing strategy.
Directed browsing, as characterised by Marchionini (1995), was conducted in the form of scanning the result lists to compare well-deﬁned
sets of objects. In the semantically open and ill-deﬁned task C, on the
other hand, the main search strategy applied was browsing of historical
eras to explore the Military Museum’s collections related to the Second
World War. Compared with the other three tasks, participants applied a
less systematic, semi-directed browsing when examining records.
However, instead of browsing, ﬁve participants (B, K, L, R, and S)
chose to apply rather speciﬁc, free-text queries in task C (e.g., a search
on the “Madsen machine gun” related to the Second World War).
Ingwersen and Järvelin (2005, p. 293) explain how searchers may
very well seek known items –avoiding topical searching – feeling the
former to be easier. Hence, a known item search function as a starting
point for ﬁnding “something topically similar or content-like” with
respect to the found item. The example shows how transition between
the different information need types is continuous.
5.3. Four characteristics of museum visitors’ web search behaviour
Four main characteristics of online museum visitors’ searching
behaviour were identiﬁed as a result of the inductive content analysis.
In the coding process, observations of participants’ searching behaviour
during the simulated search tasks sessions were coupled with participants’ explanations and comments related to the search sessions. The
coding process identiﬁed and grouped aspects of visitor motivation
and applied search strategies. In this way, the four characteristics
emerged from the authors’ interpretation of the coded data.
5.3.1. A highly visual experience
Participants’ searching behaviour has a strong visual aspect, which is
conﬁrmed by ﬁndings on preferred data elements (see Table 4). The
photographs in the collection database were used as browsing, identiﬁcation, selection, and zooming devices. Thumbnail images of photographs shown in the result lists constituted an important feature
which that supported participants when browsing the result lists and
choosing which records to view. Participants commented, “It is really
nice. The photographs in the result list help you to deselect many
items” (Participant S: line 94) and “It is a good thing. Especially when
I know something about the items because then I can quickly go
through the list and ﬁnd what I need” (Participant M: line 148).
Thumbnail images in the result list were also used during browsing
to gain an overview of the search result. The visual aspect was especially

important in simulated search task A, where a photograph of a
“purchased” powder horn was shown to the participants. Comparing
this photograph with the thumbnail images helped participants to decide
which museum objects resembled the “purchased” item (Participants D,
F, I, Q, V and Y).
5.3.2. Exploratory searching behaviour
This subsection addresses characteristics relating to an exploratory
searching behaviour of online museum visitors, which is predominantly
in topical searching. The visual aspects of searching behaviour directly
support exploratory behaviour. Different aspects of exploratory
searching behaviour were identiﬁed across task types. The most significant was information encountering, as described by Erdelez (2000) or
the strongly related aspect of serendipity (Foster & Ford, 2003). Quotes
from participants illustrate how participants recognise the accidental
encountering of information during browsing or targeted search for
some other information; for instance:
You might see a hundred ‘gravkors’ [a type of sword] which all have
an often seen mark from, e.g., the 5th or the 7th battalion. But then
you see one with an absolutely crazy mark which no one can explain.
And that is the fun part of it…. (Participant A: line 164).
Another aspect signifying an exploratory approach to information
seeking is how participants choose which records to view. For example,
during the semantically open and ill-deﬁned topical search task C (the
Second World War), participants were asked how they decided which
records to open from the search result list. Their answers can be
grouped into two categories: either they pursued a known item to see
if the museum records veriﬁed information already familiar to them;
or participants followed items that somehow differentiated from the
other items in the result list or caused surprise. The latter signiﬁes an exploratory approach. Thus, based on observation of the search tasks and
participants’ comments from the talk-aloud session, the following three
elements were identiﬁed to support accidental or serendipitous
discoveries:
• Photographs were used to support browsing. Especially useful were
photographs that showed the context of the object (e.g., how an
object was used or related to other objects).
• References between related objects allowed users to discover new
associations.
• The collection database supported both browsing through historical
eras and query search entries. Hence, different structures of the
information space also supported information encountering.
5.3.3. Broad known item or element searches
In general, participants knew what they were looking for and, due to
their long-standing interest in defence and military history, they knew
professional jargon. In three out of the four simulated search tasks, the

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

main search strategy applied was a free text search (see Table 5). Very
few and broad search terms were used (e.g., “colt,” instead of “colt
navy”) because ambiguous or insufﬁcient object descriptions challenge
the search process:
It is interesting to see what information the Museum holds on the
G3. . . . Everyone knows that it is the old German MG42 which was
changed and bought by the Danish army in 1962. That is why we call
it the M62 machine gun. However, correctly it is called MG3 –
Maschine Gewehr drei. But no one knows what a MG3 is. But everyone knows the M62.... And what about the production year of the
MG3? Is it the production year of the Museum’s item or is it the
production year of the model? (Participant I: line 96).
Likewise, due to the sometimes-ambiguous object descriptions,
several participants described how they accepted browsing through a
long result list to ﬁnd their known item. In other words, low precision
was accepted in order to achieve high recall. This ﬁnding supports
explorative search behaviour.
5.3.4. Meaning making
The concept of meaning making was introduced in Section 3.1 and
different aspects of meaning making were identiﬁed. First, the digitization strategy of the Military Museum’s collection database, representing
a mix of raw and reﬁned information (Orna & Pettitt, 1998), meant that
online museum visitors were not directed by the choices and views
expressed in carefully designed exhibitions with highly mediated
information; instead they were free to (or forced to) navigate and
follow their own paths. Consequently, they relied on their background
knowledge of defence and military history in order to conclude how
objects relate or differentiate, or in order to make implicit features of
information explicit, etc. As an example, a participant looked for
characteristics that could help differentiate between similar models to
form a general view of the objects in the search result:
When I browsed around looking at the different riﬂe models 1889s, I
tried to establish my own leitmotif. How do they differ? How can I be
completely sure? How can I tell the differences between them? Yes,
here are two important differences and they will help me differentiate
later. (Participant L: line 98).
Likewise, a participant used his background knowledge on the
Second World War to add to the scarce associated historical context
information in the collection database. He tried to establish a link
between a speciﬁc object and the historical context:
I recognise many of the weapons from what I have read and been
told about the Allies’ weapon supplies [to Denmark]. However, I’m
puzzled about the Russian machine gun in this context. How did that
come all the way to Kolding? Maybe, it could be that… (Participant
K: line 197).
The examples show how participants used their previous experience
and special knowledge of military history to help them interpret new
cues. In this way, they attempt to place what they encounter within
the context of their experience as part of a meaning making process.

97

a recent call (Ellenbogen et al., 2008; Marty, 2008) to explore the use of
digital museum resources in the daily lives of museum visitors.
7. Conclusion
The present case study of special interest museum visitors’ interactions with the Military Museum’s collection database adds to understanding of the characteristics of information-searching behaviour in
the context of digital museum resources. The methodological approach
goes beyond survey questionnaires and focuses on content-based reasons for museum visiting. Accordingly, the results regarding visitor motivation show that the two most frequent purposes were to ﬁnd
“information on a speciﬁc type of museum object” and “a photograph
or illustration.” The study successfully reached the target population of
special interest museum visitors, which was intentionally different
from related survey studies (e.g., Marty, 2007, 2008). Results on
preferred data elements also relate to visitor motivation and provide information on a more detailed level. First and foremost, the ﬁndings
stress the strong visual aspect of searching online museum collections.
In addition, most metadata elements on factual, object-related information, provenience, and the historic context was indicated relevant by the
majority of the respondents, characterising the group of special interest
museum visitors as information hungry. The results of the quantitative
data on search attribute and search strategy dimensions show that the
ill-deﬁned task C, especially, differs from the other three tasks. The latter
represent various types of well-deﬁned information needs. In the illdeﬁned, topical information task, the main search strategy applied
was browsing of historical eras combined with semi-directed browsing
of result lists. In the other three tasks, the main search strategy was free
text searching and direct browsing of search results. The results indicate
an association between task and “average search time”: more time is
spent on semantically open topical search tasks. Knowledge of preferred
data elements and search attributes provides suggestions that can inform planning of museum digitisation efforts.
Four main characteristics of online museum visitors’ searching behaviour were identiﬁed: (a) a highly visual experience, (b) exploratory
behaviour, (c) broad known item/element search, and (d) meaning
making. The ﬁrst aspect stresses the strong visual aspect of searching
virtual museum collections and that photographs are used as scanning,
identiﬁcation, selection, and zooming devices. The simulated search
tasks showed how participants used broad search terms and accepted
low precision in order to secure high recall. This said, exploratory aspects of searching behaviour were identiﬁed across search tasks (e.g.,
information encountering and serendipitous discoveries). Accordingly,
the design of information systems providing access to museum collections should support both known item and exploratory searches. Finally, across tasks, meaning making is deﬁned as the fourth main aspect of
online museum visitors’ searching behaviour. In the process of meaning
making users rely on their speciﬁc background knowledge and experiences to navigate and make sense of information found (Weil, 2002).
The four characteristics add to our understanding of how special interest
museum visitors interact with digital museum resources, thus adding to
previous studies of visitor motivations explaining why they interact.
Acknowledgments

6. Future research
The present case study focuses on a small museum collection. Future
research should encompass a more realistic research design on user interaction with larger cultural heritage collections (e.g., the Europeana
portal: www.europeana.eu/portal) providing access to millions of
cultural heritage objects. Finally, it is relevant to take an informationseeking perspective on digital museum resources and study information
needs, as well as use of information sources and channels, to add to the
characteristic of the elusive online museum visitor and, thereby, answer

The authors would like to thank the museum professionals at the
Defence Museum who kindly agreed to link to the survey and further
provided valuable insights into and discussions of the study.
References
Anderson, G. (2004). Reinventing the museum: Historical and contemporary perspectives on
the paradigm shift. Lanham, MD: Altamira.
Black, G. (2005). The engaging museum: Developing museums for visitor involvement.
London, UK: Routledge.

98

M. Skov, P. Ingwersen / Library & Information Science Research 36 (2014) 91–98

Booth, B. (1998a). Understanding the information needs of visitors to museums. Museum
Management and Curatorship, 17(2), 139–157.
Booth, B. (1998b). Information for visitors to cultural attractions. Journal of Information
Science, 24(5), 291–303.
Borlund, P. (2000). Experimental components for the evaluation of interactive information
retrieval systems. Journal of Documentation, 56, 71–90.
Ellenbogen, K., Falk, J., & Goldman, K. H. (2008). Understanding the motivations of museum
audiences. In P. F. Marty, & K. B. Jones (Eds.), Museum informatics: People, information,
and technology in museums (pp. 187–194). New York, NY: Routledge.
Erdelez, S. (2000). Towards understanding information encountering on the web. In D. H.
Kraft (Ed.), Proceedings of the 63rd ASIS Annual Meeting, 12-16 November, 2000, Chicago
(pp. 363–371). Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D. (2000). Learning from museums: Visitor experiences and the
making of meaning. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Fantoni, S. F., Stein, R., & Bowman, G. (2012). Exploring the relationship between visitor
motivation and engagement in online museum audiences. In J. Trant, & D. Bearman
(Eds.), Museums and the Web 2012: Proceedings. Toronto, Canada: Archives & Museum
Informatics.
Foster, A., & Ford, N. (2003). Serendipity and information seeking: An empirical study.
Journal of Documentation, 59, 321–340.
Goldman, K. H., & Schaller, D. (2004). Exploring motivational factors and visitor
satisfaction in on-line museum visits. In D. Bearman, & J. Trant (Eds.), Museums
and the Web 2004: Proceedings (pp. 223–235). Toronto, Canada: Archives &
Museum Informatics.
Ingwersen, P. (1982). Search procedures in a library - analysed from the cognitive point of
view. Journal of Documentation, 38, 165–191.
Ingwersen, P., & Järvelin, K. (2005). The turn: Integration of information seeking and retrieval
in context. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Jörgensen, C. (2004). Unlocking the museum: A manifesto. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 55, 462–464.
Kravchyna, V., & Hastings, S. (2002). Informational value of museum web sites. First
Monday, 7(2), http://dx.doi.org/10.5210/fm.v7i2.929.
Marchionini, G. (1995). Information seeking in electronic environments. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Markey, K. (2007). Twenty-ﬁve years of end-user searching. Part 1: Research ﬁndings.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58, 1071–1081.
Marty, P. F. (2007). Museum websites and museum visitors: Before and after the museum
visit. Museum Management and Curatorship, 22(4), 337–360.
Marty, P. F. (2008). Museum websites and museum visitors: Digital museum resources
and their use. Museum Management and Curatorship, 23(1), 81–99.
Marty, P. F. (2011). My lost museum: User expectations and motivations for creating
personal digital collections on museum websites. Library & Information Science
Research, 33, 211–219.
Orna, E., & Pettitt, C. W. (1998). Information management in museums. Aldershot, UK:
Gower.
Semper, R. (1998). Designing hybrid environments: Integrating media into exhibition
space. In S. Thomas, & A. Mintz (Eds.), The virtual and the real: Media in the museum
(pp. 119–127). Washington, DC: American Association of Museums.

Silverman, L. H. (1995). Visitor meaning-making in museums for a new age. Curator,
38(3), 161–170.
Skov, M. (2009). The reinvented museum: Exploring information seeking behaviour in a
digital museum context (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Copenhagen, Denmark:
Royal School of Library and Information Science. Retrieved from http://pure.iva.dk/
ﬁles/30768221/MetteSkovThesis.pdf
Styliani, S., Fotis, L., Kostas, K., & Petros, P. (2009). Virtual museums, a survey and some
issues for consideration. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 10, 520–528.
Tombros, A., Ruthven, I., & Jose, J. M. (2005). How users assess web pages for information
seeking. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 56,
327–344.
Van den Haak, M. J., de Jong, M. D. T., & Schellens, P. J. (2003). Retrospective vs. concurrent
think-aloud protocols: Testing the usability of an online library catalogue. Behaviour
& Information Technology, 22(5), 339–351.
Weil, S. E. (2002). Making museums matter. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Zhang, Y. (2000). Using the internet for survey research: A case study. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 51, 57–68.
Mette Skov is an assistant professor in the Department of Communication and Psychology
at Aalborg University, Denmark. She holds a master’s and PhD degree in library and
information science from the Royal School of Library and Information Science, University
of Copenhagen, Denmark. Her research interests include access to cultural heritage
collections, everyday life information seeking, and qualitative perspectives on interactive
information retrieval. She has presented her research at several international conferences,
including Information Interaction in Context (IIiX) and the Conference and Labs of the
Evaluation Forum (CLEF), and has published in Information Processing & Management.
Peter Ingwersen is professor emeritus at the Royal School of Library and Information
Science at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. He holds doctorates from the
Copenhagen Business School and Tampere University, Finland, and was previously
afﬁliated with the European Space Agency, Rutgers University, the Department of Information Studies at Tampere University, and Åbo Akademi University (Turku, Finland). His
research interests include interactive information retrieval (IR); evaluation methods for
work task-based IR; informetrics, scientometrics, and webometrics. He has published
several well-known research monographs, and more than 120 journal articles (in journals
such as Scientometrics, Information Processing & Management, and the Journal of the American
Society for Information Science & Technology) and conference papers. He has received
numerous academic awards, including the Jason Farradane Award the Association for
Information Science & Technology (ASIS&T) Distinguished Research Award, the ASIS&T Best
Information Science Teacher Award, and the Derek de Solla Price Medal. He is a member of
the editorial boards of ﬁve internationally leading journals in IR and bibliometrics and has
organized or chaired the program for a number of international conferences.

