Paying Attention: The Duration and
Allocation of Visitors’ Time
in Museum Exhibitions
BEVERLY
SERRELL
A B

sTR AcT

The amount of time visitors spend and the number of stops they make in
exhibitions are systematic measures that can be indicators of learning. Previous authors have made assumptions about the amount of attention visitors
pay to exhibitions based on observations of behavior at single exhibits or
other small data samples. This study offers a large database from a comparative investigation of the duration and allocation of visitors’time in 108 exhibitions, and it establishes numerical indexes that reflect patterns of visitor
use of the exhibition. These indexes-sweep rate (SRI) and percentage of diligent visitors (%DV)-can be used to compare one exhibition to another, or to
compare the same exhibition under two (or more) different circumstances.
Patterns of visitor behavior found in many of the study sites included: (1) visitors typically spend less than 20 minutes in exhibitions, regardless of the
topic or size; (2) the majority of visitors are not “diligent visitors”-those who
stop at more than half of the available elements; (3) on average, visitors use
exhibitions at a rate of 200 to 400 square feet per minute; and( 4) visitors typically spend less time per unit area in larger exhibitions and diorama halls
than in smaller or nondiorama exhibitions. The two indexes (SRI and %DV)
may be useful measures for diagnosing and improving the effectiveness of
exhibitions, and further study could help identify characteristics of “thoroughly-used (i.e., successful) exhibitions.

INTRODUCTION

As museum practitioners, part of our job is to encourage diverse populations in the
activities of learning and discovery and to adapt our exhibitions to reach the largest
possible audience in an engaging and cost-effective way. We want visitors to feel that
the time they invest has been well spent.
Museum practitioners can become informed about ways to improve their educational exhibitions by carefully watching how visitors spend time and pay attention
in existing exhibitions. With real rather than ideal visitors in mind, we can plan and
deliver more effective interpretation in our galleries.
Over the past seven years, a study of the duration and allocation of visitors’ time
in museum exhibitions has been conducted for two purposes: to develop a system of
measurement that is easy to use, widely applicable, and not costly and to create a
database for identifying thoroughly-used exhibitions (Serrell, 1992, 1993).
This study investigated and compared a diversity of museum types, visitor variBeverly Serrell is the director of Serrell & Associates, 5429 S. Dorchester Avenue, Chicago, IL 60615.

108

CURATOR 4012

J U N E 1997

109

ables, and design considerations all at once. It concentrated on two indexes
(described in detail below) that incorporate important visitor variables (time spent
and stops made) and exhibition variables of size (in square feet) and number of elements (i.e., conceptual and physical groupings of objects, art, specimens, phenomena, and interpretive devices). As a summative evaluation technique, these indexes
reflect the amount of time visitors spent in the given display area and the proportion
of visitors who used the exhibition fully (“diligent visitors”). Together, these fundamental variables effectively capture an important measure-how thoroughly visitors
used an exhibition. This is not to dismiss other variables as unimportant or to suggest that the problem of understanding how visitors use exhibitions is simpler than
it is. Yet these measures are practical, immediately applicable ideas for thinking
about how visitors use exhibitions and measuring progress toward the goal of thorough use of exhibitions by their audience.
This study is a work in progress, and the ideas and interpretations are presented in the hope that they will provide fodder and inspiration for continued data collection, further analysis, and lively discussion.
SIGNIFICANCE OF ATTENTION A N D T I M E

Regardless of who they are, why they came, how many times they have been to the
exhibition before, or whom they are with, the essential and simplest data that can be
collected about visitors is the time they spent paying attention to the exhibits during
that visit. The easily measured quality of being thoroughly used is an accessible tool
for museum practitioners in almost any museum. This information can help an
exhibit development team make
more realistic decisions about exhibit size;
more informed choices about of the different kinds of media and experiences we
offer; and, most important,
better matches between visitors’ expectations and the museum’s objectives.
At the present time, there are no systematic, shared methods to judge impact and no
agreed-upon standards against which to measure our success (Serrell, 1997). Ticket
sales and head counts are used to judge popularity and marketing effectiveness; exit
interviews and comment books are the primary means used to survey visitors’ likes
and dislikes, but these do not give clear evidence of educational impact. Pre- and
post-tests for cognitive gains-similar to testing in traditional school setting-have
been used to measure an exhibit’s educational effectiveness with visitors, yet these
kinds of tests seem inappropriate for museum visitors who are under no obligation
whatsoever to learn anything. We are still searching for better ways to assess impact,
ones that are appropriate and adequate for the casual nature of informal learning in
exhibitions (Crane, 1994).
“ T R U I S M S ” THAT MAY OR MAY N O T BE T R U E

The following are some of the truisms about visitor behavior in exhibitions-common (but not universal) occurrences that have been observed by others (e.g., Miles,

110

BEVERLY S E R R E L L

PAYING ATTENTION

1993; Melton, 1933 and 1935; Bitgood, 1996; Beer, 1987; Falk, 1992)-confirmed
during this study (including data on traffic patterns that are not reported here).
Things being equal, visitors will turn right and follow the right-hand wall through
a gallery
Exhibits near the entrance often get more attention than those at the end.
Few people move into the center to explore island exhibits.
Large exhibitions have different averages for time spent than small ones.
The exit has a strong attraction. People often leave at the first opportunity to do so.
The time available to hold visitors’ attention is very limited.
Other assumptions that may be held by museum practictioners but which may be
less true than commonly thought are addressed by the findings of this study, such as
the most common overall patterns in the frequency distributions of time data; visitor browsing patterns and the relationship between time spent and number of stops
made; and patterns of visitor time and use according to museum type and size of
exhibition.
Time data can clarify and perhaps change some assumptions. The large database of time and stops data collected systematically from many types of exhibitions
for this study shows what is average and which exhibitions are exceptionally low or
high in usage according to what visitors tell us with their feet. Using the database,
we can translate statements like “They stayed a long time and looked at everything”
into actual numbers that allow relative comparisons.
OBJECTIONS TO T H E FOCUS ON TIME

Possible challenges to an analysis of time alone may be:
“Time doesn’t mean anything; you can have an epiphany experience in a
glance, in seconds.” or
“Time data is unreliable, especially when it’s collected by inexperienced data
collectors.” or
“I spend more time studying something when it is confusing, so time is not a
measure of interest and enjoyment.” or

“Time spent isn’t what’s really important to know.”
How might these objections be addressed?
Regarding Epiphanies-Certainly epiphany experiences in seconds are possible, but
are the majority of visitors having them? As George Hein suggests, “Moments of profound insight can be traced back to longer periods of preparation” (Hein, 1996).
Most visitors, I contend, need appropriate and carefully planned help in the gallery
to have as many mini-epiphany “ah-ha” moments on the spot as possible.
Regarding Unreliability-Few standardized methods of data collection and analysis
are available to museum practitioners who are not trained in evaluation. What most
museum staff lack, however, is not the ability but the time to do evaluation. (It is

C U R A T O R 4012

JUNE 1997

111

ironic that we lack the time to find out about how visitors spend time.) The methods
presented here are not new, but they have been refined, simplified, and streamlined
so that a first-time reader of the methods workbook developed for this study should
be able to follow the directions and definitions to participate reliably in this research.
Regarding Time as a Measure of Struggling to Understand Something DifficultGiven the informal and social nature of museum visits, unless visitors quickly get
some enjoyable, provocative, or personally meaningful feedback from an exhibition,
their attention will turn elsewhere. “Attention,” as Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi points
out, “is a scarce resource-perhaps the most precious scarce resource there is” (Csikszentmihalyi and Hermanson, 1995). If the exhibit challenges are not matched to
their skills, visitors will not pay attention.
Regarding What Is Important to Know-I agree that what is really necessary is a
better understanding of what visitors are learning and under what conditions. My
research only provides a first look-evidence about where learning might be taking
place. Harris Shettel says, “Time on task has been found to be one of the most useful predictors of educational or training effectiveness, and it has been used for this
purpose in countless studies” (Shettel, 1996). The places where visitors stop most
often are also among those frequently mentioned as most memorable. This relationship between observations of visitor behavior and the feedback received in exit interviews suggests that behaviors can be indicative of interest, engagement, and
memory. Borun (1996), Giusti (1995), Korn (in Mann, 1993), Litwak (1994), and Foster (1992) have also noted this relationship in museums of art, science, natural history, and cultural history. Visitors do not have eyes in the backs of their heads, so if
you do not see them paying attention, it is unlikely that learning is taking place.
METHODS

The data for this study on the duration and allocation of visitors’ time is from 108
exhibitions, including 32 exhibitions at science museums, 29 at natural history
museums, 14 at zoos and aquariums, 20 at history museums, and 13 at art museums.
Data came opportunistically from several sources: summative evaluation studies
conducted by Serrell & Associates commisioned by a variety of museums from 1990
to 1997; summative evaluation studies conducted specifically for this project by Serre11 & Associates, supported in part by the National Science Foundation during
1996-1 997; and summative evaluation studies conducted by other evaluators (inhouse and independent contractors) and reported in the literature or shared informally with the author.’
There were no blockbusters (timed ticketed, exceedingly popular temporary
exhibitions). The exhibitions represent typical fare in museums across the board,
although certainly every exhibition, like every visitor, is unique and has its own set
of complex variables. What the data reflect are some broad trends among them.*
Each study tracked and timed adult visitors to an exhibition who made the selfselected decision to be there (i.e., were not part of a tour group). The individuals

112

BEVERLY S E R R E L L

PAYING ATTENTION

tracked were visiting alone or as members of a family or a group of adults. They were
viewing educational exhibitions with didactic goals; that is, the exhibit developers
had an intended message in mind and revealed that message through a variety of elements, e.g., objects, artifacts, art, phenomena, and media, such as labels, videos,
computers, mechanical or electronic interactives, brochures, handouts, gallery
guides, and so on. Exhibitions without interpretive materials were not part of this
study.
A stop at an element in an exhibition was defined as both feet planted on the
floor, visitor’s head or eyes pointing in the direction of the element for two to three
seconds or more. A return to a previously visited element did not count as an additional stop, but it was included in the total time. Thus, if a person stopped at least
once at every available element, the number of stops for that visitor and the number
of elements in the exhibition would be the same.
All of the data collected specifically for this study followed these procedures.’
The data collector reviewed the workbook (which gives definitions and instructions
about how to conduct a tracking-and-timing study for use in this database), made up
a data-collecting sheet (basically a floor plan of the exhibition, showing the space
and all elements), and tried it out with a few randomly-selected adult visitors. The
data collector faxed the sheets to the author. A phone conversation resolved questions about coding and protocol. Over the next few weeks, the data collector completed observations of usually at least 40 visitors on different days of the week and
mailed the results to the author.
Critical data were the total time spent for each visitor and the number of stops
each visitor made at the individual elements of the exhibition. Visitors’ time data was
summarized as an average and as a frequency distribution to give a more complete
picture of the sample overall rather than simply calculating the mean. Figure 1 is an
example of the data for one exhibition, Discovery and Deceit, plotted in this way.
Among the observations of 39 visitors, the longest total time spent was 68 minutes;
the shortest time was one minute; and the average was 19 minute^.^ This is a skewed
pattern. It is not a normal curve (highest bars at the average, in the center), and it is
not bimodal (high bars on the left and right, lower bars in the center).
The number of stops made by visitors to an exhibition also can be shown as a
frequency distribution, graphed as the raw number of total stops (Figure 2A) or the
percentage of the elements used (total stops divided by available stops, rounded to
the nearest whole number). Percentages allow comparisons of exhibitions with different numbers of elements. Figure 2B is an example of data plotted is this way. It
shows that five people used less than 10% of the elements, and three people stopped
at all of the elements (100%). Although the tallest bars are on the left, almost half of
the visitors (19 out of 39, or about 49%, represented by the bars to the right of the
50% mark) used more than half of the elements.
Another way to look at the time and stops data is with a scattergram, which plots
the relationship between the two variables of total time spent and the percentage of
stops made by each visitor. The scattergram (Figure 3) is a good tool for seeing a
whole set of observations in one glance, with each dot on the scattergram representing one visitor. The dots spread from the lower left (low time, low percent of

CURATOR 40/2

113

JUNE 1997

Figure 1. Frequency distribution
of total time spent by 39 visitors
in the exhibition Discovery and
Deceit. Average time was 19
minutes (39 visitors collectively
spent 740 minutes).

10

Total time spent in exhibition (minutes)

12

,

Figure 2A. Frequency distribution of number of stops made
by each visitor (n = 39) out of
18 available elements in the
exhibition Discovery and Deceit.
Ten visitors stopped at 1 to 3
elements. Three of the visitors
represented in the bar at the far
right stopped at all 18 elements.

10-

r

8-

' t . -

i?

B

6-

2 5
z 42-

o+
0

.
Number of stops made by individual visitors in exhibition

Figure 28. Frequency distribution of the percentage of stops
made by each visitor (n = 39)
out of stops at 18 available
elements in the exhibition
Discovery and Deceit.

7
30

40

50

60

70

Percentage of available stops in exhibition

80

90

100

Discovery and Deceit: Archaeology and
the Forger's Craft
At The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, Kansas City, Missouri
October 11, 1996 through January 5, 1997
The young Roman girl, dated to the third century
The exhibition displayed more than 80 works of
A.D. and shown here is an example. Through the
art from 16 American museums and collectionsuse of surgeon's lights, a microscope and powergenuine treasures from great ancient civilizations,
ful
gamma-rays, art conservators determined that
an almost equal number of forgeries, and reworked
the sculpture had been extensively reworked by
or over-restored antiquities.
a modern craftsman. Portions of the head had
A large art conservator's studio allowed
been repaired with new marble, new plaster ears
museumgoers to view X-ray and gammaray
had been added, and a thin layer of pigment was
images and use ultraviolet light to distinguish the
applied to "age" the additions. Gamma-rays
real and the fake. The exhibition also examined
revealed that the neck of the sculpture had been
the role of traditional art historical analyses of
broken, and a series of metal dowels and clamps
style in authenticating works of art.
In one display, viewers can look at a 3,000- had been inserted to hold it together.
The exhibition made an important contribuyear-old Egyptian relief under ultraviolet light to
tion in that it has resuscitated genuine sculpdiscover that parts of the sculpture have been
tures that some scholars had condemned as
repainted by a modern-day craftsman seeking to
forgeries-for example, the Roman gentleman
"improve" the work. The eyes of the figures glow
shown here.
under ultraviolet, revealing that they were painted
The exhibition was organized by The Nelwith zinc white, a material not used until the
son-Atkins Museum of Art, and funding has been
nineteenth century.
made possible by The National Endowment for
Discovery and Deceit also explores how many
the Arts, The CampbellCalvin Fund, and the
ancient works of art receive modern "cosmetic
Missouri Arts Council, a state agency.
surgery" to make them more complete and salable.

Forged Greek Boxers
Scholars suspected that
these terra-cotta boxers
were not ancient but forgeries. Two famous boxers
carved by Canova between
1795 and 1806 seem to
have been the models.
Scientific tests have proven
that these are forgeries.

Genuine Roman Portrait
Some doubted the authenticity of this genuine
ancient Roman portrait. It seemed more like a
caricature of a Roman. A few saw an unsettling
resemblance to the actor Raymond Massey;
others saw an uncanny similarity with Walter
Matthau. It is, however, a little known fact that
such powerful, realistic portraits are typical of
early 2nd-century A.D. Rome. Scientists have
confirmed the head’s authenticity by finding
traces of ancient paint in the statue’s drapery.

All photographs courtesy of The Nelson-Atkins
Museum of Art. Photography by Robert
Newcombe.

Reworked 3rd-Century A.D. Roman Head
Careful examination with the naked eye and
natural light reveal inconsistencies in this portrait
that reflect the work of a modern over-zealous
restorer.
Steps in the ‘discovery” process employ close
observation and photography. Nature has damaged
the surface of much of the hair. The normally polished surface of many braids has worn away,
revealing the marble’s sugar-like structure. Many
of the braids were carefully and deeply carved.
The face, however, is SmOOth, and the features
are superficial. Clearly the restorer prettified what
must have been a badly battered face.
The color and high polish of the braids at
the top of the head differ from the rest of the
hair. This is a new piece of marble added by the
restorer to fill a seriously damaged area of the
cranium. The bun of hair behind the head is thinner on its crudely carved top than on its neatly
sculpted bottom. The restorer apparently found
the top of the bun so badly damaged that he had
to recarve it (though sloppily).
Gamma-ray images can penetrate stone
and reveal that the top of the head was recently
added. They also show that the neck was broken
and restored in modern times with metal dowels
and clamps.

In an ultraviolet photograph, the chin, nose,
ear and part of the cheek glow while the rest of the
head Stands neutrally. Ultraviolet light can affect
differently two surfaces that seem identical but
have a different chemical make-up. The restorer
added the parts that glow in the photograph.

116

BEVERLY S E R R E L L

-

people who stayed longer
tendedtousetheexhibition*

-m.

0

%

0
0

0

0

0

0

0

leastimedud
f.wsrelementa
# 6 %

Figure 3. Scattergram of visitors' total time and percentage of stops in Discovery
and Deceit exhibition. Each
circle represents one visitor
(n=39). (Overlapping circles
have been offset so they
can be seen.)

0

0

Mvidtwsstpyed

PAYING A T T E N T I O N

0

0

0

8

8 c P

0 0
- 0
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

stops) to the upper right quadrant (highest times, highest percent of stops).
To make comparisons between exhibitions, two indexes were developed: one is
the percentage of diligent visitors (%DV); the other is sweep-rate index (SRI):
% DV-This

index is obtained by calculating the percentage of visitors who stopped
at more than half the elements. The percentage of diligent visitors is a gauge of how
thoroughly an exhibition was used.s The higher the %DV index, the more thoroughly the exhibition was used.
SRI-The other index is called the sweep-rate index, or SRI. For each exhibition, the
average total time spent was divided into the exhibition's square footage. SRI is a
square-feet-per-minute index and allows exhibitions of different sizes to be compared fairly. It represents the amount of space-per-time used by the sample of visitors as they visually sweep the area of the exhibition. The lower the SRI, the more
time visitors spent per unit of area.
The novel aspect of this research is its contribution of a practical and achievable
method. Together, the indexes allow comparisons between time spent in exhibitions
of different sizes (square footage) and the thoroughness of use of exhibitions with
different densities (number of elements).
Another kind of scattergram (Figure 4) was created to show the relationship and
distribution of the %DV and SRI for all the exhibitions.6 Although there is a slight
inverse correlation between SRI and %DV (that is, as SRI went down, the percentage of diligent visitors increased), the two indexes are not dependent. Exhibitions
can and do have low sweep rates without having high percentages of diligent visitors. As defined in this study, a thoroughly-used exhibition is one where both SRI
and %DV are better than average.

CURATOR 4 0 / 2

117

J U N E 1997

Figure 4. Scattergram of sweep rate indexes and percentage of diligent visitors in 86 different
exhibitions. Each square represents one exhibition. (Lower SRI = more time spent per unit area.)
100

000

800

700
600
500
400

300
200
100

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

%DV= Percentage of "diligent visitors" (people who stopped at more than half of available elements)

Quadrants A, B, C, and D:
A-Exhibitions with the highest sweep rates and the low percentages of diligent visitors.
B-High percentages of diligent visitors, but high sweep rates.
C-Low sweep rates, but low percentages of diligent visitors, i.e., used "slowly" but not thoroughly.
D-Low sweep rates and higher percentages of diligent viewers i.e., used slowly and more thoroughly.
Area E-"Exceptional"-the 1 1 most thoroughly-used exhibitions, defined as exhibitions with SRls
under 300 and %DV greater than 50%.

OVERALL FINDINGS

Figure 5 lists the summary descriptive statistics for the database for exhibition size,
number of elements, average time, %DV, and SRI. Figures 6 and 7 show the frequency distributions of %DV and SRI for 108 exhibitions. From these data, several
patterns emerge.
It appears typical for diligent visitors to make up less than one-third of the exhibition's audience.
The %DV ranged from several exhibitions with zero %DV (where no one in the
sample used more than half of the elements) to 86% diligent visitors.
Among large and small, permanent and temporary, science-related and nonscience exhibitions, %DV did not differ greatly, averaging overall around 27%.
Among types of museums (e.g., zoo, art, natural history, history, science), average %DV ranged from 18% (science museums) to 38% (zoo/aquariums). Given small
sample sizes of subgroups by type, the difficulty of defining what might be considered typical within a subgroup, and the complexity of variables for each exhibition,
conclusions about differences in %DV by museum type are purely speculative.
Sweep rates vary by size and type of exhibition, but among nondioramas, the average is 300.

BEVERLY S E R R E L L * PAYING ATTENTION

118

Table 1 . Means and standard deviations for five exhibition variables (standard deviations in parentheses).

Sample

N

~~

Square
Feet

lumber Q
Ilements

Average
Time

SRI

% DV

108

4597.2
(3122.1)

37.3
(27.1)

13.6
(9.3)

435.7
(448.6)

26.4
(21.1)

All dioramas

16

7316.5
(3342.4)

36.3
(29.3)

13.7
(11.1)

638.5
(236.7)

23.3
(19.8)

All nondioramas

86

3894.8
(2690.6)

38.2
(27.2)

14.2
(9.0)

300.6
(160.1)

27.4
(22.0)

Total sample [includingdioramas (16),
nondiorama (86)and old exhibitions (S)]

Large nondiorama exhibitions
(>3,900
square feet)

31

6916.1
(2050.2)

53.0
(24.4)

20.1
(8.5)

400.5
(191.5)

23.4
(20.4)

Small nondiorama exhibitions
(<3,900
square feet)

55

2179.2
(973.1)

29.9
(25.6)

10.7
(7.5)

244.3
(1 04.8)

29.7
(22.8)

3165.0
(1550.2)

29.2
(11.9)

17.3
(9.1)

200.2
(83.8)

67.0
(11.4)

4200
3200

19
32

221

48

49
79

Exceptionally thoroughly-usedexhibitions

Case Studies
Discovey and Deceit
Judth Le ster A Dutch Master
and Her hodd

11

18

100

Seventy-five percent of the 86 nondiorama exhibitions in the study had SRIs
between 100 and 400, with an average of 300.
Large exhibitions (more than 3,900 square feet) had higher sweep rates than
small ones. This finding suggests that visitors use big exhibitions “faster” (more
square feet per minute) than small ones.
Dioramalike exhibitions-in which much of the square footage is occupied by
exhibit elements-also typically had higher sweep rates than nondioramas. The lowest SRI achieved by a diorama, however, was 325, very close to the average for nondioramas, which suggests that being a diorama does not preclude a low sweep rate.
Some dioramas do generate extended visitor attention.
Few exhibitions are thoroughly used.
The most thoroughly-used exhibitions were those with comparatively lower SRIs
and higher %DV indexes (as shown in Figure 4). “Exceptional” is defined in this
study as exhibitions with SRI scores below 300 and %DV scores greater than 50%.’
They included only eleven exhibitions from all types and sizes of museums studied.
A CASE STUDY A N D MAKING COMPARISONS

Figures 1,2A and 2B, and 3 discussed earlier were drawn from data gathered on visitors to Discovery and Deceit: Archaeology and the Forgerk Craft at The Nelson-Atkins

CURATOR 4012

J U N E 1997

Figure 5. Frequency distribution of %DV in sam-

i:~

119

Figure 6. Frequency distribution of SRI in sample
of 86 exhibitions (all nondioramas).

.220

2E
z'

10

5

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Percentage of diligent visitors

90

1

0

0

100

2

Sweep Rate Index (SRI)--squarefeet per minute

Museum of Art in Kansas City. This exhibition was interpreted through storytelling
labels, objects, photographs, context, and interactive devices. Figure 1 showed that
nine people spent less than five minutes, two people spent between 65 and 70 minutes, and 24 out of 39 people (62%) spent less than 20 minutes.
At the museum where the study was done, staff were disappointed in the average time of 19 minutes. In planning the exhibition, a conscious effort to "break the
20-minute barrier" had led to a goal of having visitors stay an average of 30 minutes.
Compared to all other exhibitions in the study, the average total time of 19 minutes
for Discovery and Deceit was not unusual. In 80% of the 108 exhibitions, the average
time was less than 20 minutes, regardless of the size or topic of the exhibition. The
right-skewed pattern of the frequency distribution of the total times in Discovery and
Deceit (Figure 1) is also typical for the majority of time distributions in the research
study as a whole. Normal and bimodal patterns were uncommon.
The correlation between time and percentage of stops on the scattergram of Discovery and Deceit (Figure 3) is also typical. For each of the 108 samples, each totaltime-percent-stops scattergram showed that as the total time increased, the
percentage of the elements used also increased.8 It is not random.
In Discovery and Deceit, there was a higher-than-average percentage of diligent
visitors who paid attention to more than half of the elements (49%). On some exhibition scattergrams, almost all of the dots are located in the lower left corner (low
time, low number of stops), with no diligent visitors.
In Figure 4, the square on the scattergram for Discovery and Deceit is located in
quadrant D. Representing an SRI of 22 1 and a %DV of 49%, it was among the more
thoroughly used exhibitions, but not among the exceptional ones in area E of the
scattergram.

120

BEVERLY SERRELL

PAYING ATTENTION

WHAT MAKES AN EXHIBITION THOROUGHLY USED?

Naturally, we want to know why the top 11 exhibitions engaged their audiences for
so long. Although that complex question was not specifically part of this study (the
results of the tracking and timing study certainly do not provide any magic-bullet
formulas), case studies of the high-ranking exhibitions can give some clues. For
example, the art exhibition that was most thoroughly used (highest %DV) and had
visitors spending the most time spent per unit space (lowest SRI) was Judith Leyster:
A Dutch Master and Her World, a temporary show at the Worcester Art Museum
in Massachu~etts.~
The exhibit developer attributed the exhibition’s success largely
to the nature of the exhibition, especially the care taken with developing appropriate
communication objectives, clear and visually based exhibit content in the labels and
an installation that was not crowded, conceptually or physically. The main messages
of Judith Leyster were not put only in the labels-they were expressed and reinforced
in the total design of the art and interpretive components, and every area of the exhibition contained elements that would be attractive to the majority of visitors (Hess,
1997).1° These characteristics have previously been noted as guidelines for good
exhibition design (McLean, 1993; Serrell, 1996). What is unusual about the Leyster
example is that intent was corroborated by data. The experiences the exhibit developers planned for visitors to engage in and what visitors chose to do were actually
very similar.
For every exceptional exhibition (judged by the indexes compared here), there is
probably a unique and extensive set of variables and conditions. While this study
does not attempt to identify many of the variables, it nevertheless establishes a
method of determining whether success exists. When we establish a database of 30
or more exceptional exhibitions, some of the shared features of thoroughly-used
exhibitions might become apparent.
TIME AND IMPLICATIONS FOR LEARNING AND EXHIBIT PLANNING

Many exhibit developers plan exhibits in terms of “first visitors will do this, then they
will do that.” They assume that visitors will use the exhibit elements in the intended
sequence and spend whatever time is necessary to build up an understanding of the
exhibition’s messages. In fact, tracking and timing data suggest that visitors go
where they want to go. They skip elements, visit only one-third of them, and spend
much less time than is often assumed-typically less than 20 minutes.
These trends in visitor behavior have clear implications for museum practitioners
designing educational exhibitions who are concerned about effective communication of their didactic objectives:
If the exhibition’s main message requires extensive label reading, the majority
of visitors will probably not be able to understand it. If the exhibition’s main message requires visiting a high percentage of the elements to piece together the story,
then the majority of visitors will likely not get it.
If an exhibition contains different thematic sections, visitors will need to use
some exhibit elements in each section to understand the different themes. As we saw

CURATOR 4012

J U N E 1997

121

with Discovery and Deceit, less than half of the visitors to the exhibition stopped at
more than half of the elements. A newspaper review described the visitor experience
in this exhibition like this: “In a series of images, viewers are led step by step through
the process of authentication and can see how the various clues are put together to
arrive at a final conclusion” (Conrads, 1997). This assumes a linear, thorough visit
pattern. But how many visitors actually followed the whole train of thought? Not as
many as the exhibit planners expected, and this exhibition is an example of one that
was more thoroughly used than most.
If the exhibition’smessage is clear and quickly and easily accessible, high time
and high use will not be necessary for understanding the exhibition. But higher time
and more thorough use can create more opportunities for visitors to discover more
new ideas, to gain a deeper understanding of previously known ideas, or to spend
more time contemplating “old friends.”
WHAT PURPOSE DO T H E S E DATA AND I N D E X E S SERVE?

For museum practitioners who value the quality of thorough use, these data can be
applied diagnostically on existing or new exhibitions.
1. A systematic tracking and timing study can be conducted on an existing exhibition. After determining the sweep-rate index and percentage of diligent visitors,
locate the exhibition’s place on the “metascattergram” (Figure 4). Is that where you
thought it would be? Are you pleased with its position?
2. As a new exhibition is developed, a goal for sweep-rate index and percentage
of diligent visitors can be set (through discussion, based on your efforts, your visitors, your topic, and your museum). After the exhibition opens, a tracking-and-timing study can compare the actual results with your expectations. Were the
expectations met?
Once SRI and %DV have been determined on either an old or new exhibition,
changes might be made to the exhibition specifically to encourage visitors to move
more slowly, stop more often, and stop longer by fixing elements that were not working, i.e., were often skipped by visitors (for reasons that became apparent during the
tracking observations). Then a second tracking can be done to see whether SRIs and
%DVs actually changed for the better.
IN CONCLUSION

Visitor behavior is not random; there are patterns. Visitors who spend relatively
more time usually are the ones who stop at more elements and become engaged in
more of what the exhibition has to offer. Instead of spending more time at a few
stops, the pattern seems to be to spend more time by making more stops. For many
exhibitions, an average total time of less than 20 minutes is common.
The visitor’s experience is not made up of what the exhibition offers, but rather
it consists of what he or she chooses to attend to. To hold visitors’ attention, we first
have to attract it. By taking a closer look at how visitors behave, we can learn appropriate ways to inform exhibit design so it will lead to increased visitor satisfaction.

122

BEVERLY SERRELL

PAYING A T T E N T I O N

The indexes and database developed in this study create a common ground for discussions. It is my hope that the database can continue to grow, evolve, and contribute to our knowledge of how visitors are paying attention in exhibitions. When a
sufficient number of exhibitions have been found to have a low SRI and a high %DV,
researchers may be able to correlate these measures with certain characteristics of
the exhibitions. Further confirmation of a set of common characteristics for successful (or thoroughly used) exhibitions would come from the incorporation of goals
for these indexes in the planning process and comparing with actual results of visitor behavior in the exhibition.
If we want visitors to spend substantially more of their most precious
resources-time and attention-in our galleries, we will have to make exhibit elements more intrinsically rewarding for a broader range of ages and abilities and
increase their appeal to, and thus their use by, a broader range of visitors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I owe special thanks to Randi Kom, Margaret Menninger, Ellen Giusti, and Lisa
Mackinney for their interest and contributions to this project since it started in 1993.
Ann Brubaker, director of education at the Nelson-Atkins; Pat Villeneuve, who teaches museum education of the nearby University of Kansas; Pamela Keinholz-Hayes,
one of her students, and curator Robert Cohon were the individuals contacted about
the Discovery and Deceit exhibition. More than 60 individuals have contributed to
this research project, and they will all be recognized in the final report available from
AAM as a Professional Practice Series publication later this year. A grant to Serrell
& Associates from the National Science Foundation in 1996 made possible the completion and dissemination of this study.
NOTES

Submitting data to this study did not constitute an endorsement of the analysis
or interpretations of this report; rather, it was considered a contribution in the
spirit of cooperation toward the goal of a better understanding of museum visitor studies.
Because the samples were not selected to be representative of all museums and
exhibition types, and because some of the subgroup samples are small (e.g., 13
art museums), and because exclusive definitions for what constitutes an art
exhibition versus a science exhibition are sometimes difficult to make, these
findings cannot claim to be statistically representative of all museums. However, the sampling techniques did not contain any known bias or intention to prejudice the results, and therefore, they are simply presented as a reasonable
sample. The main conclusions and implications of this research, however, do not
rely on the assumption that the sample is representative.
Data not collected specifically for this study was not used if the definitions were
unknown or incompatible with those of this study. There were more than a
dozen visitor studies contributed that could not be used.

CURATOR 4 0 / 2

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

J U N E 1997

123

Typically, standard deviations were large, and in all cases but one, the median
time was lower than the average (mean). Standard deviations and medians will
be reported in the final report.
I have tried to name this index in a nonjudgmental way, without pigeonholing
or stereotyping visitors unfairly. We cannot assume level of interest by time
alone, and we cannot assume meaning-making or learning by time alone. Other
researchers have named longer-time visitors in a variety of ways, e.g., “more
serious visitors.” Diligent is more assumption- and value-free-visitors might be
diligent because of who they are or because of the exhibition context, or both.
What makes them diligent is not the question of this study. The question here is
simply what percentage are diligent, for whatever reasons.
In the sample of 108, there were 16 exhibitions that were categorized as dioramalike, that is, they had very large elements that occupied much of the square
footage of the exhibition. In addition, there were six exhibitions that were classified as “old,” meaning that the data were collected prior to renovations that
added newer techniques of interpretation. These 22 samples are not included on
this graph, Figure 4, which would have extended the range of SRI to 1200 and
raised the average SRI. This deletion did not affect the %DV pattern.
When the median percentage of stops made by visitors in an exhibition exceeds
50%, the percentage of diligent visitors also exceeds 50%. Either calculation
results with the same exhibitions in the lower right quadrant of Figure 4. I chose
%DV instead of median percentages of stops because it was more expressive of
the population (group) overall, and because the median cannot achieve either
100% or zero. One-hundred-percent diligent visitors is an ambitious but achievable goal for thorough use; zero diligent visitors raises important questions
about “bang for the b u c k and visitor satisfaction.
Statistical values for regression lines will be given in the final report.
The data had been collected in 1993 during an evaluation conducted by George
Hein (Hein, 1994).
Case studies of other thoroughly-used exhibitions and exhibitions that have
been studied in multiple-site installations will be included in the final report on
this research.

REFERENCES

Beer, Valerie. (1987). “Great Expectations: Do Museums Know What Visitors Are
Doing?” Curator 30/3:200-2 15.
Bicknell, Sandra, and Farmelo, Graham. (1993). Museum Visitor Studies in the 90s.
London: Science Museum.
Bitgood, S.; Hamberger,W.; Hines, J.; and Ford, W. (1995). “Visitor Circulation Through
a Changing Exhibits Gallery.” Visitor Behavior W2: 9.
Borun, Minda; Chambers, Margaret; and Cleghorn, Ann. (1995). “Family Learning in
Four Science Museums: Preliminary Results.” Current Trends in Audience
Research and Evaluation 9:116-124.

124

-.

BEVERLY S E R R E L L

PAYING ATTENTION

(1996). “Families Are Learning in Science Museums.” Curator 39/2:123-138.
Conrads, David. (1996). “Progress is Real for Those in the Business of Spotting
Fakes.” The Christian Science Monitor, October 9, p. 12.
Crane, Valerie. (1994). Informal Science Learning. Westwood, MA: Research Communications, Ltd.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, and Hermanson, Kim. ( 1995). “Intrinsic Motivation in
Museums: What Makes Visitors Want to Learn?” Museum News 74: 34-37,
59-62.
Eason, Laurie P., and Linn, Marcia C. (1976). “Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Participatory Exhibits.” Curator 19/1:45-62.
Foster, John Scott. (1992). The Effects of Visitor Perceptions and Encoding Cues on
Learning from Museum Exhibits. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
Giusti, Ellen. (1993). Unpublished, in-house summative evaluation report on“Hal1of
Human Biology and Evolution” at the American Museum of Natural History,
NY.
-.
(1994). “Visitors Evaluate Evolution Hall.” Exhibitionist 1312:15-1 9.
Hein, George; Hughes, C.; and Mello, R. (1994). “Evaluation of Judith Leyster: A
Dutch Master and Her World.” Worcester, MA: Worcester Art Museum.
Hein, George. (1996). “The Dilemma of Constructivism: Do We Focus on the Learner at the Expense of What We Want to Teach?” Lecture at ASTC Annual Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA.
Hess, Honee. (1997). Personal communication.
Korn, Randi. (1995). “An Analysis of Differences Between Visitors at Natural History Museums and Science Centers.” Curator 3813:150-160.
Litwak, Jane Marie, and Cutting, Andrea. (1994). Unpublished in-house summative
evaluation report on Remedial Evaluation o f A Common Ground. at the Minnesota History Center, St. Paul, MN.
Mann, C. Griffith (Ed.). (1993). The Visitor? Voice. Cleveland, OH: The Cleveland
Museum of Art.
McLean, Kathleen. (1993). Planning for People in Museum Exhibitions. Washington,
DC: Association of Science-Technology Centers.
Melton, Arthur W. (1935). Problems of Installation in Museums of Art. Washington,
DC: American Association of Museums.
-.
(1933). “Studies of Installation at the Pennsylvania Museum of Art.” Museum
News 1 2 / 5 4
Miles, Roger. (1993). “Holding Power: To Choose Time Is to Save Time.” What
Research Says About Learning in Science Museums 2:17-20.
Serrell, B. (1992). “The 51% Solution: Defining a Successful Exhibit by Visitor
Behavior.” In Current Trends in Audience Research and Evaluation 6. Jacksonville, AL: Center for Social Design. (Published for the AAM.)
-.
(1993). “Using Behaviour to Define the Effectiveness of Exhibitions.” In Sandra Bicknell and Graham Farmelo (Eds.). Museum Visitor Studies in the 90s.
London, England: Science Museum.

C U R A T O R 40/2

-.

J U N E 1997

125

(1995). “The 51% Solution Research Project: A Meta-analysis of Visitor
Time/Use in Museum Exhibitions.” Visitor Behavior W3, Fall.
-.
(1996a). Exhibit Labels: An Interpretive Approach. Walnut Creek, C A AltaMira
Press, a division of Sage Publications.
-.
(1996b). “In Search of Generalizability: New Tools for Visitors Studies.”
Journal of Museum Education 21/3:11-18.
Shettel, Hams. (1995). “Should the 51% Solution Come with a Caution Label?”
Visitor Behavior X / 3 , Fall.

