Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

Scienscope: Hand-Held Mediation Device for
Facilitating Exploratory Behaviors with Exhibits in Museum Visitors
HyeonBeom Yi
Dept. of Industrial Design KAIST,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea
hyeonbeom@kaist.ac.kr

Jaehoon Pyun
Dept. of Industrial Design KAIST,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea
jhp960918@kaist.ac.kr

ABSTRACT
Many museums have begun to use mobile devices to
provide interactive content to visitors. However, such
devices can also easily distract visitors, drawing their
attention away from the exhibits. In this pictorial,
we show the steps in designing Scienscope—a
hand-held mediation device that can be used as
a stethoscope to explore additional information
hidden within exhibits at close range. As Scienscope
hovers on authentic objects, it provides digital
content and audio-haptic feedback, reinforcing the
visitors’ exploratory behaviors. After interviewing
museum experts and bodystorming the museum
space, we followed an iterative design process using
low-fi prototyping to explore the users’ experience.
Three application scenarios were devised to show
how Scienscope can be used for different types of
exhibits. We discussed how visitors respond to and
explore hidden information about exhibits at close
range, which can be helpful for museum curators
and designers.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@
acm.org.
DIS ‘20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6974-9/20/07…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395581

Chaeeun Lee
Dept. of Industrial Design KAIST,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea
chann@kaist.ac.kr

Authors Keywords
Visiting experience; museum; interactive mediation
device; interactive exhibition

CSS Concepts
• Human-centered computing~Interaction
design~Interaction design process and
methods~Contextual design

INTRODUCTION

Since the 1990s, museums have been using
interactive technologies to improve simple oneway information delivery, such as fixed texts and
images [11]. Motivating visitors to engage with
exhibits is important to avoid causing fatigue and
losing interest in exhibits [5]. The museums provide
mediation devices such as audio guides, kiosks,
smartphones, and tablets that motivate visitors to
induce exploratory behavior [16] with additional
exhibit information [8]. Mobile devices with RFID
[7, 9], AR features [4, 22] are now widely utilized
to increase the interactivity of exhibits, enriching
the exhibition experience [2, 6] by stimulating
interest and encouraging learning [3, 21].
However, applying mobile technologies in museums
can also have negative consequences. The “lure
of the screen” issue is a well-known problem
wherein the display distracts visitors’ attentional
focus from the exhibit. It decreases engagement
with the exhibits [19] and motivation to explore
the exhibits. Wessel and Mayr [20] suggested a

Woohun Lee
Dept. of Industrial Design KAIST,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea
woohun.lee@kaist.ac.kr

possible solution for this challenge involving mobile
devices called “magic lenses” which can contain
real-world objects and virtual information at the
same time. By providing additional information with
exhibits in a single display, it enhances attention
to the exhibits itself. In reality, many museums
provide mobile augmented reality (AR) applications
to overlay virtual information on real exhibits in a
single display as proposed in the “magic window”
[2, 4, 22]. Additionally, physical form factors can be
used to induce user’s natural behavior to observe
the exhibits by enclosing the mobile device with the
exhibition’s theme [17] or borrowing the appearance
of observing tools such as a magnifying glass [18].
These strategies do not completely solve the “lure
of the screen” issue, because all the interactions
take place in a distance from exhibits.
This pictorial presents the design process of a handheld mediation device called “Scienscope”, which
facilitates the exploratory behavior of visitors by
enabling interaction with museum exhibits in a close
range. After conducting interviews with experts and
bodystorming in the museum space, we devised a
device that provides additional information to users
while minimizing distraction from the exhibits. The
user can move Scienscope over the surface of the
exhibit and manipulate the joystick to view a variety
of additional information, thereby enhancing their
understanding of the exhibit.

709

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

EXPERT INTERVIEW
We conducted interviews with museum experts to
find out how museum visitors enjoy the exhibits
and how new interactive technologies are accepted.
We interviewed exhibition curators from three
museums—Geological Museum (C1), Seodaemun
Museum of Natural History (C2), and National Science
Museum (C3) —which exhibit abundant natural
science content. The curators interviewed in this
study were not only in charge of exhibition planning
and installation, but also they had a good grasp of
actual visitors’ behavior through observations over
years. They were interviewed for one and a half
hours each, while guiding us through the museums.
We were able to look over the actual exhibits and
therefore take more practical case-based responses.

““We cannot use long texts, it’s really
hard to decide where to highlight for
visitors… That, that one (a rotating
trilobite model) for attracting the
viewers to see even more.” – C1
“That one (Biotite which can be
torn into slices) is most popular
for children. They prefer to touch
things themselves with their
hands. Even some adults do.” – C2

“
Visitors usually glimpse
each exhibit for a moment
The curators’ biggest concern was that visitors have
very short attention spans. Visitors usually glimpse
the exhibits for a moment and then pass through.
According to research, museum visitors spend less
than one minute on each exhibit [1]. The museums’
primary goal is to make visitors see and explore
the exhibits enough to understand the underlying
themes, but this is also the most challenging goal.
C1 and C3 said that most visitors stay longer in
exhibits that are easy to identify at a glance (e.g.
dinosaur bones and fossils). Therefore, they always
think about how to deliver information related to
the other exhibits. Museums attempt to attract
more attention to the exhibit by allowing visitors to
navigate mobile devices. This, however, introduces
the “lure of the screen” issue discussed earlier, which
hinders visitors’ commitment to exhibits.

Tangible objects
rather than information on display
It is well known that visitors prefer physical objects or
tangible interactive installations over digital content
on display screens [11]. The curators we interviewed
confirmed this trend.

Different needs and interests of visitors

Visitors prefer hands-on experiences overviewing
texts and images. In particular, young children are
more interested in exhibits with which they can
interact using their bodies. Tangible samples (e.g.
fossil replicas and mineral crystals) are more popular
among visitors than smartphone-based content with
a lot of information. For this reason, museums provide
samples that visitors can touch and observe directly
with observing tools such as magnifying glasses,
microscopes, and telescopes. It seems that exhibits
that provide multi-modal sensory engagement are
more attractive to visitors.

There are no “general” visitors or “general” museums
[15]. Each visitor has different needs and interests.
In the three museums we visited, the main visitors
are young children and their parents. Nevertheless,
all the curators mentioned that many experts and
adults also visit these museums. For this reason,
museums must consider various age groups,
specialties, and areas of interest to design sufficiently
nuanced exhibits. Curators said that a single device
should be able to target multiple types of visitors at
the same time. C2 said it would be best to have a
guide that is optimized for every individual visitor.

710

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

BODYSTORMING IN THE MUSEUM
The expert interviews produced three major
results: the visitors’ short interest in exhibits,
their preference for tangible objects, and the
different needs on information. We could discover
that some touchable exhibits and observing tools
(ex. magnifier, microscope, etc.) were placed in
museums for satisfying visitors’ preference for
tangible interaction. We assumed that if visitors
were able to search for hidden information through
the behavioral metaphor of those observing
tools, their short interest in the exhibits can be
extended. To test this initial idea, we conducted
a bodystorming [10] activity for imaging how
additional information could be provided to
visitors with a new mediation device borrowing the
observing behavior.
While conducting the interviews, we found that
the Geological Museum possesses plenty of
touchable exhibits and but also contains additional
information in panels that are not immediately
interesting enough. Therefore, we chose the
Geological Museum to conduct the bodystorming.
We prepared magnifying glasses, monocles,
binoculars, and stethoscopes which are the
observing tools that we could see while visiting
museums. The activity was conducted for one and
a half hours. While observing diverse exhibits with
those tools, we imagined new interactions that
can be triggered by observing behaviors and how
additional information can be popped up. For each

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

idea, we took a picture with a Polaroid camera and
noted which observing tool was used and how it
could provide additional information. A total of 42
ideas were generated, and we clustered those into
groups in the lab setting.

AFFINITY DIAGRAMMING IN THE LAB
Based on the expert interviews and the ideation
process in the museum, we clarified the three
design features by clustering the 42 ideas in the
lab. In this process, we focused on what kinds
of interactions the new mediation device should
provide for museum visitors.
Exploring the surface of exhibits with
augmented information
Most of our ideas were generated from the
stethoscope and magnifying glass, which enabled
us to explore the surface of objects. For example,
when a user hovers the device like a magnifying
glass over the surface of a rock sample, the device
could provide a digital image of crystal inside of a
rock. When the user moves the device horizontally
over the surface of the exhibit, the digital image
could also follow the movement, giving the user
the impression that they can see through the rock
sample. They can provide visitors with a physical
exploratory experience.

Multi-Layered Information
Our ideas suggested not only lateral surface
exploration but also depth (perpendicular to the
surface) exploration. For example, when a visitor
zooms into the rock’s surface, the device could
display continuous images from low-magnification
surface texture to high-magnification molecular
structure. On the other hand, when the device
recognizes a dinosaur fossil, visitors could find
more information related to the dinosaur’s habitat
or food. By providing multi-layered information and
allowing visitors to navigate based on the depth of
information they need, museums can satisfy the
various interests of different types of visitors.
Multi-Modal Feedback
Some ideas from the bodystorming session
addressed visitors’ expectations for multi-modal
feedback. In particular, the ideas that used the
stethoscope addressed expectations about audiohaptic feedback. For example, one idea involved
playing a roaring sound from a fossil sample. When
the device recognizes a dinosaur fossil, it provides
not only the roaring sound but also a vibration.
The sound can be felt from the exhibit’s surface.
As Pursey and Lomas [14] opined, exhibits with
multi-modal sensations can appeal to visitors. We
expect that adding a mediation device’s multimodal feedback to hands-on experience can
engage visitors with exhibits.

711

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

SCIENSCOPE: CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT

For objects in showcases, additional information is
often provided on the panel, display, or window,
making it difficult for visitors to concentrate on the
exhibits. We expect that the alignment of attentional focus and objects in showcases can strengthen
the physical relationship between information and
exhibits. For example, when a visitor places Scienscope on the glass over the teeth of a dinosaur’s
mandible bone, it displays a magnified image of the
teeth surface. A corresponding audio guide can be
provided for interpretation. This interaction technique can make visitors feel like they are closely
examining the objects that they cannot touch.

Instant VR view mode

Scienscope can also provide physical and cognitive depth to information. Visitors can selectively
find more information while hovering Scienscope
over the surface of exhibits or showcases. For example, visitors can see through deeper levels of a
rock sample’s internal structure, or open pop-up
information windows to search for more detailed
information, such as the composition or molecular
structures of minerals. This multi-layered information could then reinforce visitor engagement with
the exhibit.

Scienscope can display hidden information while it
is moving along the surface of exhibits (e.g. objects, replicas, scale models, and panels). For the
touchable objects, Scienscope can function as a
magnifier, providing see-through or magnified images and blurring the boundary between exhibits
and virtual images. It can also play a related informational video to interpret the exhibit.

Magnifying surface of exhibits in
showcase

Providing deeper level of information

See-through metaphor

Based on the three design features from the previous session – exploring the surface of exhibits,
multi-layered information, and the need for multimodal feedback – we derived the concept of a mediation device called Scienscope. It used the behavioral metaphor of a magnifier and a stethoscope so
that exhibits could be viewed up-close. Scienscope
can show information layers while hovering on the
surface of exhibits, and also can engage visitors
with multi-modal output.

In sum, Scienscope can be used on the surface of
exhibits to allow museum visitors to explore hidden information related to the exhibition. However,
we can also bring Scienscope to the eye (monoscopically). In this position, the device provides an
immersive VR view through which visitors can explore hidden information related to the exhibit in a
spacious virtual environment. The transition to VR
view should be simple and swift.

712

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

Starting with the Expert
Interview as a formative
study, we choose to conduct
Bodystorming for generating
many ideas of a new mediation device. Through the Affinity Diagramming, we narrow downed the ideas into
three design features. The
concept of Scienscope developed based on the design
features.

STORYBOARDING
We conducted storyboarding
to identify the flow of detailed functions according to
the user tasks, and to structure the ideas for organizing
the required functions to be
developed.

713

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

PROTOTYPING SCIENSCOPE

We designed Scienscope to be small enough and attached a good grip to it. Thus, it is easy to hold and
manipulate. Since two-hand operation is quite burdensome and can restrict hands-on experience in the
museum, the main body of Scienscope and the grip
were integrated into a single-bodied aluminum case
so that vibrotactile haptic sensations are effectively
transferred to the user’s hand. Through an iterative
process of low-fi prototyping and testing, the size and
shape of the handgrips were determined. The screen
was masked with a circular shape to look like the lens
of the observing tools. Finally, all the components,
including the smartphone, sensors, interface board,
earphone, and aluminum enclosure, were assembled.
Initial study models

Final prototype

Smartphones already have good audio-visual displays
and computing power, and so we utilized a smartphone with a smaller form factor to implement Scienscope concept. We developed a sensor module for
object identification and surface tracking, and we integrated a haptic engine and a Fresnel lens cap to
provide a richer sensory experience. We also built an
interface board that communicates with the smartphone: it delivers sensor inputs to the phone and
renders audio-haptic signals from the phone to the
actuators.

Form-giving process

714

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

HARDWARE FEATURES

Navigation in the information space
Scienscope is a means to explore hidden information on museum exhibits.
The information should be grouped
and layered carefully so that people
are inspired to look for information with curiosity. An input device
is needed for users to navigate the
information space. We tested input
device candidates and finally chose
a thumb-slide joystick (COM- 09426)
because it has a small footprint and
provides good tactile feedback for
manipulation.

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

Instant monocular VR
Scienscope has a small circular display. We developed a detachable VR viewer, which is tapered-cylinder-shaped and
equipped with a Fresnel lens (f = 45mm, Ø = 40mm). The
viewer can easily be attached to Scienscope thanks to the
embedded neodymium magnets when needed. It provides a
monocular VR view so that users can check related information and pay attention to surroundings at the same time. An
easy transition to the normal view prevents undesirable distractions from the real exhibits.

Audio & Haptic feedback
Scienscope can provide audio and haptic
feedback. For instance, if we can hear a
heartbeat sound, we can feel the vibration from the heart as well. To convert
the sound signal into a haptic signal, we
developed an application rendering the
result via the haptic engine (IP6bm-001).
Audio information can be transmitted to a
user via an earphone. Vibro-tactile haptic
information can be felt while holding Scienscope.

Object identification and surface tracking
Scienscope should be able to identify an
exhibit and detect its own position on the
surface so that it can display related digital information. We utilized RFID tags and
a reader module (LSMSJZNCFMF-198) for
object identification, and a combination of
displacement sensor (Pixart PAT9125ELTKIT) and infrared proximity sensor (STMicroelectronics VL6180) for surface
tracking.

715

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

Inside the
human body

APPLICATION 01

Panels are the most common way of
communicating information in many
museums. In this application, visitors can
explore the human cardiovascular system
using Scienscope by hovering over the
panel. Once Scienscope reads the RFID tags
in the blue stickers on the panel, visitors
can see through the cardiovascular system
on the display and observe blood vessels
all over the body. In addition, audiohaptic feedback from the heartbeat, which
becomes stronger or weaker depending on
the distance from the heart, provides a more
realistic exhibition experience.

RFID Tag

Into the cardiovascular system
Moving Scienscope over the human body
panel, visitors can see the cardiovascular
system, which is invisible with the naked
eye. Putting Scienscope onto one of the tags
of the panel enables visitors to see through
the surface to the blood vessels in the area
beneath Scienscope. Scienscope then uses
distance sensors and mouse sensors to identify
relative position changes from the tags on the
panel. The combined effect is that visitors can
intuitively look into the cardiovascular system.
Using joystick on the device, visitors also can
zoom in-out the contents.
Multi- modal heartbeat
Scienscope enables visitors to experience
exhibits in a more immersive way with multimodal channels. This application provides
heart-beating animation with audio-haptic
feedback. Visitors can listen to and feel the
lively heart beating through the sound effect
and vibrations of Scienscope. This feedback
adds a more spatial sense of reality by
providing stronger feedback as it gets closer
to the heart.

Zoom in and out

716

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

APPLICATION 02
Anmiation of engine
operating mechanism

How does
the engine work
Augmenting virtual images on an exhibit is
useful for conveying complex concepts [21].
This application shows an animation of the
internal mechanism of a four-stroke engine.
When you place Scienscope on the object,
the device plays the animation at the same
size and rate as the real engine model. This
helps visitors to understand concepts that
are difficult to explain with text or image
materials. Projecting content onto real objects
makes visitors feel as though they are seeing
through objects, as with the “magic lens.”
Furthermore, audio-haptic feedback allows
visitors to feel the vibration of the engine
working.

Visualize the mechanism
When the visitor takes Scienscope onto
the tag on the four-stroke engine system,
Scienscope will play the internal mechanism
animation, which exactly matches the size and
position of the exhibit. As the video is directly
proportional to the scale model, it gives the
visitor a feeling of peering inside the object.
In addition, through the combination of video,
audio-haptic feedback, and audio guides, all
synchronized with the physical movement of
the exhibit, it is possible to deliver complex
conceptual information more effectively.
More than a simple video
With Scienscope’s multi-modal feedback,
exhibit types such as scale model or replica
can be more realistic. In the case of this
application, take Scienscope onto the small
automaton engine model, then sound and
vibration of the engine come over through
the device.

717

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

APPLICATION 03

Historical feature
When Scienscope is placed in proximity
to an RFID tag attached on a showcase
near the bell tower, the bell-ringing video
is played with audio-haptic feedback,
explaining the historical background of
the bell, its socio-cultural meaning, and
how and why it was used.

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

Exploring
historical architecture
In this application, there is a famous historical building
model (the Cathedral of Notre Dame) inside a showcase,
and tags are attached on each side. Each tag allows visitors
to enjoy different perspectives on the contents in various
ways—VR content, video, further text/image explanation.
As such, visitors walking around the showcase can learn
about various aspects of the topic (history, art, society/
culture, etc.) through each of the tags. Furthermore, they
can explore more detailed information using the joystick.

Original exterior
Scienscope can also show when
and how the building was built
and how it originally looked in
the Middle Ages. Through audio
guides and videos, Scienscope
visually shows the environment
in which the cathedral was
originally built.

Pop-up detailed information

Internal structure
When placed near the RFID
tag by the façade of the model
of
the
Cathedral
of
Notre
Dame, Scienscope explains the
architectural style, stained glass,
and artwork used in the building
with augmented VR content. The
interior structure can be viewed
freely over 360 degrees from the
vantage point of a person standing
at the tagged location.

718

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

PRELIMINARY STUDY

Motivating exploratory behavior

We held a short, three-day exhibition at the Geological Museum. Total of 33 groups of visitors have come
and used Scienscope. (24 groups of children and
parents; mean age of children: 8.5yr, SD: 2.6 and
9 groups of adults; mean age: 24.8, SD: 9.5) While
conducting the exhibition, we observed visitors’ behavior and responses. After their viewing, we asked
questions through an interview lasting between 10
and 15 minutes. The interview consists of questions,
what content was most enjoyable, which moment was
the most memorable, and whether they felt curious
after viewing the exhibit through Scienscope.

Many children visited our exhibition with their
parents or instructors. Most of them wanted
to carry and use Scienscope themselves, even
before they received an explanation about
how to use it. Children showed the greatest
interest in the “Inside the human body” exhibit, as they used Scienscope to watch, listen
to, and feel the beating heart as blood was delivered through the blood vessels. In this way,
Scienscope enriched the experience of the exhibition through multi-sensory feedback.

I want to do it
myself!

Gothic architectures
are,,,, aha!

Different age groups,
different understanding levels
The use of Scienscope varied greatly depending on
the age group—all were interested in exploring the
hidden information through Scienscope regardless of
age groups, but they showed differences in understanding the contents. Once Scienscope started showing the content, the younger were the visitors, the
more passively they enjoyed it, having more interest
in the content itself. On the other hand, older or more
knowledgeable groups attempted to manipulate the
joystick or interact with Scienscope in other ways to
explore the contents in more detail.

Stimulating curiosity in exhibits
When visitors used Scienscope during the exhibition, they tried to explore areas other than those
that we had prepared. Scienscope is designed to
be intuitive for anyone to use easily, allowing visitors to minimize the perceptual gap between the
exhibits and digital content on the display. Because of this feature, in the process of discovering
the contents hidden in the exhibits with Scienscope, the visitors attempted to explore other exhibits based on their own expectations, naturally
formed due to previous experience, of how and
what type of contents could be hidden.

719

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

DISCUSSION

Hiding information to stimulate curiosity

CONCLUSION

In this section, we discuss issues deriving from the
design process and from the feedback gathered from
real visitors in the Geological Museum.

Visitors could enjoy exploring the exhibits from different angles to find the small secret tags and their
hidden stories. During the exhibitions with hidden
tags in the Geological Museum, the visitors felt curious about what contents will be in the other tags
so that they kept searching for the next tag. The
visitors compared this engagement experience to a
treasure hunt inside the exhibit and gave us positive
feedback. Although we didn’t conduct a quantitative
evaluation, it seems that curiosity was the motivation of the exploratory behaviors of visitors that we
observed. In future work, more specific research will
be needed to uncover how the information can be
hidden, the extent of curiosity, and the impact on the
museum experience.

This pictorial describes the design process of a mediation device for exploring museum exhibits at a
very close range, which serves to induce exploratory
behavior in visitors. Following expert interviews and
bodystorming, we designed Scienscope to use metaphors embodied in observing tools to provide additional information while visitors explore the surface of
exhibits. We hid additional information in RFID tags,
stimulating visitors’ curiosity and encouraging them
to discover the tags while exploring the exhibits. Consequently, we observed that visitors with Scienscope
explored exhibits more actively and extensively. Scienscope is the result of an iterative design process
starting from the expert interview and bodystorming and reflecting location-based contextual factors.
Understanding how we hid the information into the
exhibits and stimulated the visitors’ curiosity can be
helpful for exhibition curators and designers who want
to deliver diverse information in an interactive way.

New interaction techniques using a mediation
device at close distances with exhibits
Previous research has focused on augmented reality technologies that can be used at a distance from
exhibits [12, 13, 18]. In this pictorial, we were able
to see the possibility of novel interaction design by
narrowing the distance between the mediation device
and exhibits. It helped visitors keep their attentional
focus on exhibits by providing additional information
based on the visitors’ exploration of the exhibits’ surfaces, thereby solving the “lure of the screen” issue.
Also, this interaction technique seems to be more
effective than traditional display tactics in interpreting how the exhibits and additional information are
related physically. The metaphors regarding observing tools, such as magnifying and seeing through
objects, give visitors an intuitive understanding of
how information is related to display objects. For example, application 1 used a see-through metaphor,
thereby visitors can understand where the veins and
the heart are within the body.
Although we only implemented simple in-depth explorations, the interactions blurred the boundary between real and digital information and engage visitors so that they enjoy the exhibits. In this research,
a slide joystick was used as the interface for in-depth
exploration. We believe that there are more possibilities for designing interactions at close distances
by combining other interfaces like touch-based input,
voice commands, etc.

Multi-layered information for different visitors
To satisfy a variety of visitors, sufficient information
should be prepared with a proper system for the visitors to search information [20]. During the exhibition, visitors could perform not only surface exploration but also in-depth exploration for more diverse
interpretations of the exhibits. We could observe that
adults used the zoom in-out and information pop-up
functions actively, while children only tended to use
surface tracking.
It is difficult to conclude that this difference would be
the same between all adults and children; it seems
that individual visitors’ needs on information or expertise made the difference. Scienscope provided
relatively simple content, but visitors from different
age groups enjoyed interactions in the desired information layer. Thus, if more layers of information are
designed in the content, it is expected to satisfy multiple types of visitors. At the same time, the complexity of the content should be designed with caution.

REFERENCES
[1]
Beer, V. 1987. Great Expectations: Do
Museums Know What Visitors Are Doing? Curator: The Museum Journal. 30, 3 (1987), 206–215.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2151-6952.1987.
tb00664.x.
[2]
Bekele, M.K. et al. 2018. A Survey of
Augmented, Virtual, and Mixed Reality for Cultural
Heritage. 11, 2 (2018).
[3]
Cahill, C. et al. 2011. Mobile learning in
museums: How mobile supports for learning influence student behavior. Proceedings of IDC 2011 10th International Conference on Interaction Design
and Children. (2011), 21–28. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/1999030.1999033.
[4]
Challenor, J. and Ma, M. 2019. A Review of
Augmented Reality Applications for History Educa-

720

Encounters in Cultural Public Places

DIS ’20, July 6–10, 2020, Eindhoven, Netherlands

tion and Heritage Visualisation. Multimodal Technologies and Interaction. 3, 2 (2019), 39. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.3390/mti3020039.

[11]
Petrelli, D. and O’Brien, S. 2018. Phone
vs. Tangible in Museums. CHI’18. (2018), 1–12.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173686.

[5]
Davey, G. 2005. What is Museum Fatique?
Visitor Studies Today!. 8, 3 (2005), 17–21.

[12]
Pittarello, F. 2019. Designing AR enhanced
art exhibitions. (2019), 1–5. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/3351995.3352052.

[6]
Ghouaiel, N. et al. 2017. Mobile Augmented
Reality in Museums : Towards Enhancing Visitor ’ s
Learning Experience. February (2017). DOI:https://
doi.org/10.20870/IJVR.2017.17.1.2885.
[7]
Hsi, S. 2014. RFID enhances visitors’ museum experience at the Exploratorium. May (2014).
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1081992.1082021.
[8]
Jarrier, E. et al. 2019. Impact of Mediation
devices on the Museum Visit Experience and on Visitors ’ Behavioural Intentions. (2019).
[9]
Kim, H.S. et al. 2009. Improvement of
Jeju national museum service using Mobile RFID.
ACM International Conference Proceeding Series. 403, (2009), 1066–1071. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/1655925.1656118.
[10]
Oulasvirta, A. et al. 2003. Understanding
contexts by being there: Case studies in bodystorming. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing. 7, 2 (2003),
125–134. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-0030238-7.

[13]
Pollalis, C. et al. 2018. ARtLens: Enhancing
museum visitors’ engagement with African art. DIS
2018 - Companion Publication of the 2018 Designing
Interactive Systems Conference. (2018), 195–200.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3197391.3205435.
[14]
Pursey, T. and Lomas, D. 2018. Tate Sensorium: an experiment in multisensory immersive design. The Senses and Society. 13, (2018), 354–366.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/17458927.2018.151602
6.
[15]
Roederer, C. and Filser, M. 2018. Revisiting the museum experience. Qualitative Market
Research. 21, 4 (2018), 567–587. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1108/QMR-01-2017-0002.
[16]
Van Schijndel, T.J.P. et al. 2010. The exploratory behavior scale: Assessing young visitors’
hands-on behavior in science museums. Science
Education. 94, 5 (2010), 794–809. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1002/sce.20394.

[17]
Schofield, G. et al. 2018. Viking VR: Designing a virtual reality experience for a museum. DIS
2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive
Systems Conference. (2018), 805–816. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196714.
[18]
Steiner, D. 2005. The loupe. Shenandoah. 55, 1 (2005), 136. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/3363817.
[19]
Walter, T. 1996. From museum to morgue?
Electronic guides in Roman Bath. Tourism Management. 17, 4 (1996), 241–245. DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1016/0261-5177(96)00015-5.
[20]
Wessel, D. and Mayr, E. 2007. Potentials and
Challenges of Mobile Media in Museums. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies. 1, 1
(2007), 1–8.
[21]
Yoon, S.A. and Wang, J. 2014. Making the
Invisible Visible in Science Museums Through Augmented Reality Devices. February (2014), 49–55.
[22]
Yovcheva, Z. et al. 2012. Overview of smartphone augmented reality applications for tourism.
e-Review of Tourism Research. 10, 2 (2012), 63–66.

721

