SCIENCE LEARNING IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Lynn D. Dierking and John H. Falk, Section Coeditors

The Exploratory Behavior Scale:
Assessing Young Visitors’
Hands-On Behavior in Science
Museums
TESSA J. P. VAN SCHIJNDEL
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1018 WB,
The Netherlands
ROOSKE K. FRANSE
Science Learning Center, science center NEMO, Amsterdam 1000 AK, The Netherlands
MAARTJE E. J. RAIJMAKERS
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1018 WB,
The Netherlands
Received 9 July 2009; revised 18 January 2010; accepted 23 January 2010
DOI 10.1002/sce.20394
Published online 1 March 2010 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).

ABSTRACT: In this paper, we introduce the Exploratory Behavior Scale (EBS), a quantitative measure of young children’s interactivity. More specifically, the EBS is developed
from the psychological literature on exploration and play and measures the extent to
which preschoolers explore their physical environment. A practical application of the EBS
in a science museum is given. The described study was directed at optimizing parent
guidance to improve preschoolers’ exploration of exhibits in science center NEMO. In
Experiment 1, we investigated which adult coaching style resulted in the highest level of

Correspondence to: Tessa J. P. van Schijndel; e-mail: t.j.p.vanschijndel@uva.nl
Contract grant sponsor: Dutch Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
Contract grant sponsor: Dutch Curious Minds program, which is supported by the Ministry of Education,
Culture and Science and Platform Bèta Techniek.

C

2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

795

exploratory behavior at two exhibits. In Experiment 2, we investigated whether informing
parents about an effective way of coaching influenced preschoolers’ exploratory behavior
at two exhibits. The results of the study demonstrate the added value of the EBS in visitor
behavior research: compared to existing global measures of visitor interactivity; the EBS
adds information about the quality of the hands-on behavior. Compared to existing detailed
measures of visitor interactivity, the EBS has the advantage of being applicable in different
museum settings and enabling comparisons between exhibits or exhibitions. In addition,
C 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
the EBS allows for quantification of unanticipated behavior. 
Sci Ed 94:794 – 809, 2010

INTRODUCTION
Interactivity is seen as a vital characteristic of science museums (Allen, 2004). Visitors spend more time at interactive exhibits than at noninteractive exhibits (Richards &
Menninger, 2003, as cited in Allen, 2004; Sandifer, 2003) and interactivity is associated
with better learning and recall of information (Borun & Dritsas, 1997, as cited in Allen,
2004; Madden, 1985, as cited in Ramey-Gassert, Walberg, & Walberg, 1994; Schneider &
Cheslock, 2003, as cited in Allen, 2004). The effects of different aspects of interactivity on
visitor behavior and learning have been studied (e.g., Afonso & Gilbert, 2007; Sandifer,
2003). For example, Sandifer found that open-endedness and technological novelty influence the amount of time visitors spend at exhibits. Interactivity is an important ingredient
in adult visitors’ science museum experience, but it is an indispensable part of young children’s visit. Hands-on experiences are considered crucial for this group’s science learning
(French, 2004; Gelman & Brenneman, 2004; Neuman, 1971). The emphasis on interactivity with respect to young children calls for a strong need to investigate this age group’s
on-exhibit behavior. The aim of this paper is to introduce the Exploratory Behavior Scale
(EBS), a quantitative measure of preschoolers’ hands-on behavior that allows for assessing
the quality of children’s exploration in different museum settings. Before introducing the
EBS, we will present a brief overview of frequently used measures for visitor behavior in
science museums.
Research with regard to visitor behavior in science museums is also described as research
into visitors’ learning-related behaviors (McManus, 1987), visitors’ learning-associated
behaviors (Boisvert & Slez, 1994), or visitors’ learning agenda’s (Dierking & Falk, 1994).
Global time-based measures of visitor behavior have been used in the majority of studies
that concern visitor behavior at the exhibit level (e.g., Boisvert & Slez, 1994, 1995; Edu,
Inc., 2004, as cited in Brody, Bangert, & Dillon, 2008; McManus, 1987; Randi Korn &
Associates, Inc., 2002, as cited in Brody et al., 2008; Sandifer 1997, 2003). Frequently
used measures in these studies are the average time visitors spend at an exhibit (holding
time) and the percentage of visitors that stop at a certain exhibit (attraction power). Other
well-known measures concern the time visitors talk to each other at exhibits, the time
they interact or play with exhibits, and the time they spend reading at exhibits. These
measures have been used to compare different science museums, exhibitions, and exhibits
(e.g., Boisvert & Slez, 1995; Sandifer, 2003) and the behavior of different visitor groups
(e.g., Boisvert & Slez, 1994; McManus, 1987; Sandifer, 1997). In most of these studies,
descriptive or correlational research methodologies have been used and data have been
gathered by means of observations or tracking software (see Brody et al., 2008, for an
overview of research methodologies and data acquisition methods in the field of informal
science learning). It can be concluded that these time-based measures have the advantage
of being nonexhibit-specific, enabling quantitative comparisons between museum settings.
These measures, however, provide little information about the quality of visitor behavior.
Science Education

796

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

In other studies, more detailed measures of visitor behavior have been used. Instead of
solely recording the time visitors’ talk to each other at exhibits, the content of visitors’
conversations has been analyzed. These analyses have been used to investigate the use
of specific exhibits (e.g., Meisner et al., 2007; Tunnicliffe, 2000) and to investigate how
parents guide their children’s science learning (e.g., Ash, 2003; Fender & Crowley, 2007;
Siegel, Esterly, Callanan, Wright, & Navarro, 2007). More detailed measures for physical
interactivity have also been applied. Instead of solely recording the time visitors interact
with exhibits, the patterns of interaction individuals have with exhibits have been analyzed.
This technique has been done in ethnographical studies (e.g., Meisner et al., 2007) but
also in a more quantitative manner (e.g., Crowley et al., 2001; Fender & Crowley, 2007).
Crowley et al. (2001) investigated the effect of parent and peer presence on 4- to 8-yearolds exploration of the zoetrope exhibit1 at the Children’s Discovery Museum in San
Jose, California. To make a detailed analysis of children’s exploratory behavior, two main
operators of the zoetrope exhibit were defined: spinning the cylinder or not spinning the
cylinder (rotation state) and looking through the slots or looking over the top (observational
vantage point). An evidence space of the exhibit consisting of four categories was defined
by the factorial combination of rotation state and observational vantage point. By means
of observations, it was determined whether children viewed each category of evidence and
whether they viewed combinations of categories of evidence. In a follow-up study, Fender
and Crowley (2007) used the same measure to investigate the effect of parent explanation
on 3- to 8-year-olds’ exploration of the zoetrope exhibit at the Children’s Museum of
Pittsburgh. In most of the studies in which detailed measures of visitor behavior have been
used, descriptive, correlational or ethnographical research methodologies have been applied
and data have been gathered by means of observations (Brody et al., 2008). The detailed
measures provide valuable information about the quality of visitors’ behavior: visitors’
exploration of exhibits, understanding of exhibits, inquiry skills, and patterns of social
interaction. The majority of these measures, however, do not allow for comparison across
museum settings because of their exhibit-specific nature (Crowley et al., 2001; Fender &
Crowley, 2007; Tunnicliffe, 2000).
Based on this review, it can be concluded that a trade-off has to be made between being
able to measure visitor behavior in different museum settings and being able to describe
visitor behavior on a more detailed level. With regard to measuring interactivity, holding
times or interaction times allow quantitative comparisons between exhibits and exhibitions,
but do not provide information on how and on which level visitors interact with exhibits.
The measure Crowley et al. (2001) used for interactivity, on the other hand, gives insight in
how visitors manipulate the zoetrope exhibit and what kind of evidence they encounter, but
the use of this measure is restricted to this one exhibit and does not include behavior that
was not anticipated. The trade-off between global and detailed measures is more difficult
when focusing on young visitors’ behavior because the assumptions about the informative
values of both types of measures are less straightforward for this age group. With regard
to the global measures, it is often assumed that longer holding times correspond to more
opportunities to learn or even to more learning taking place (Serrell, 1998; Smith, 1990, as
cited in Ramey-Gassert et al., 1994). However, especially for the preschool age group, this
assumption is not necessarily the case. Children are known to be inefficient in the exploration
of evidence (e.g., Schauble, 1996). Preschoolers tend to manipulate materials in the same
manner for relatively long periods of time. Therefore, a more detailed analysis of children’s
hands-on behavior will yield more information about preschoolers’ opportunities to learn
1
The zoetrope is an animation device that produces the illusion of motion through a stroboscopic effect
involving persistence of vision and the phi phenomenon (Crowley et al., 2001).

Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

797

than the time-based measures. With regard to the detailed measures of visitor behavior,
measures relying on visitors’ language use have less informative value for the young visitor
group than for older visitor groups. Preschoolers’ verbal utterances cannot be considered an
accurate reflection of their level of reasoning as logic-in-action precedes verbal reasoning
in young children’s development (Gifford, 2004; Inhelder & Piaget, 1964; Singer, 2002).
Large individual differences in language skills exist in the preschool age range and a
measure of children’s reasoning relying on verbal utterances could easily be confounded
with children’s language skills. Therefore, focusing on preschoolers’ actions will yield
more information about this age group’s reasoning than focusing on their verbalizations.
In this paper, we introduce the EBS, a quantitative measure of preschoolers’ hands-on
behavior that allows for assessing the quality of children’s exploration in different museum
settings. The EBS is focused on measuring preschoolers’ exploration of their physical
environment, as from a psychological point of view exploration is a key concept in the
description of young children’s behavior. In the next part of this paper, we will describe
the EBS and its psychometrical characteristics. Next, we will give an example of a study
in which the EBS is used. Finally, we will discuss the added value of the EBS compared to
existing measures of interactivity on the basis of the results of the described study.
THE EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE
The EBS is developed from the psychological literature on exploration and play. Exploration is considered an important factor in children’s cognitive and social development (e.g.,
Rusher, Cross, & Ware, 1995; Weisler & McCall, 1976) and a universal activity in play
from infancy into childhood (Sutton-Smith, 1975). The exploration process has been described as changing with age; exploration becomes increasingly sophisticated with age, and
certain phases of the exploration process are reduced or eliminated with maturation (e.g.,
Zaporozhets, 1970, as cited in Forman & Kuschner, 2005; Weisler & McCall, 1976). For the
preschool age group that we developed the EBS for, we are interested in the quality of their
exploratory behavior, i.e. the quality of their interaction with the physical environment. For
infants, the quality of exploratory behavior has been found to correlate with measures of
cognitive ability (Jennings, Harmon, Morgan, Gaiter, & Yarrow, 1979). In addition, infant
exploratory competence has been found to correlate with caregiver stimulation and responsiveness (Belsky, Goode, & Most, 1980; Fortner-Wood & Henderson, 1997). To define the
EBS levels, process descriptions of exploration as well as existing measures of exploration
and play were examined to distinguish aspects of behavior that could be included in the
scale. Two behaviors were found to be prominent in exploration measures as well as in
play measures: manipulation of the physical environment and sustained attention (Dunn,
Kontos, & Potter, 1996; Rubenstein & Howes, 1979; Smilansky, 1968; Weisler & McCall,
1976). The time spent manually or visually investigating new objects or environments is
often taken as a measure of exploration (Weisler & McCall, 1976). Furthermore, in play
scales manipulation of the physical environment can be performed in the presence of sustained attention (active use of objects) or in the absence of sustained attention (passive use
of objects; e.g., Dunn et al., 1996).
However, manipulation and sustained attention only give a limited specification of how
children explore the environment. Therefore, to distinguish high-level exploratory behavior,
another aspect of behavior that is part of the exploration process was employed: repetition
with variation (Forman & Kuschner, 2005; Lindahl & Pramling Samuelsson, 2002). For
instance, Forman and Kuschner (2005) refer to this kind of behavior when mentioning
4- and 5-year-olds who transform objects, for example, they rotate or remove the mirrors of a periscope, to discover the workings of an object. This compound of behaviors,
Science Education

798

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

Figure 1. The exhibits Rolling, Rolling, Rolling (A) and Spinning Forces (B) at science center NEMO, Amsterdam. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

manipulation, sustained attention, and repetition with variation comprises high-level exploratory behavior and could be compared to scientific reasoning in action. An example
of high-level exploratory behavior is a young visitor of a science museum who actively
manipulates the exhibit Rolling, Rolling, Rolling (see Figure 1A) by rolling a cylinder down
different tracks and who attentively observes the effect of the different surface materials of
the tracks on the speed of the cylinder. With this high-level exploratory behavior, the child
creates exemplars of exhibit-specific phenomena; in this case that a cylinder rolls faster
over a smooth surface than over a rough surface. The sequence of behaviors that Crowley
et al. (2001) refer to as combinations of categories of evidence at the zoetrope exhibit
would also be considered high-level exploratory behavior. For instance, a child could spin
the cylinder and look over the top and then spin the cylinder again and look through the
slots. It is important to note that high-level exploratory behavior is not necessarily related
to the purposes of the exhibit. If a child applies variation by rolling cylinders up and down
the ramp or by investigating how and if a square object can also roll down the ramp, this
behavior would be seen as high-level exploration (see also Discussion).
The EBS was designed to have three levels of increasingly extensive exploration of the
physical environment: (1) passive contact, (2) active manipulation, and (3) exploratory
behavior.2 Table 1 gives a short description of the EBS levels and examples of children’s
2
The EBS consists of three levels. The Exploratory Play Scale, which has been used in child care and
development settings, is an extended version of the EBS. The Exploratory Play Scale consists of four levels;
construction and pretense play are incorporated into this scale (Van Schijndel et al., in press).

Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

799

TABLE 1
Exploratory Behavior Scale: Levels of Exploratory Behavior and Examples
of Children’s Behavior at Each of These Levels at the Exhibit Rolling,
Rolling, Rolling (see Figure 1)
1. Passive contact
A child walks, stands, sits or leans on something and may hold or transport an object.
However, the child does not manipulate the object in an active and attentive manner.
• A girl stands on the side of the exhibit and watches other children play.
• A girl leans against the exhibit. She holds a cylinder, but does not manipulate it.
• A boy walks around the exhibit with his father. They discuss different parts of the
exhibit.
2. Active manipulation
A child manipulates an object in an active and attentive manner. This implies that the child
pays attention to his or her action(s) and the outcome(s) of the action(s).
• A boy rolls a cylinder down the ramp and follows the cylinder with his eyes.
• A boy attentively hits two cylinders against each other and laughs.
• A girl rolls two PVC cylinders down a track and then says: “They are fast!”
3. Exploratory behavior
A child manipulates an object in an active and attentive manner (as Active manipulation).
In addition, the child applies repetition and variation to his or her actions. “Repetition”
implies that the child repeats an action (several times). “Variation” implies that the child
performs different actions with one object or performs the same action with different
objects. Actions that clearly differ in degree are also considered different actions.
• A girl rolls a wooden cylinder down the track covered with carpet twice after which she
rolls the same cylinder down the track covered with artificial grass.
• A boy rolls a PVC cylinder up and down the ramp several times and varies the force he
exerts on the cylinder.
• A boy rolls a wooden cylinder down the wooden track twice after which he rolls a PVC
cylinder down the same track.

Note: In the descriptions of all levels of the EBS an object is defined as any part of a
child’s physical environment.

behavior. The complete EBS and accompanying coding procedures are described in a
technical report (Van Schijndel, Singer, & Raijmakers, 2007).

Psychometrical Characteristics of the Exploratory Behavior Scale
For an observational instrument to be a useful measure of behavior, different observers
need to be able to apply the instrument in the same manner and rate behavior in similar ways.
To assess the consistency of scoring between multiple observers, interobserver reliabilities
and kappas are calculated. For the EBS, this has been done in different settings. Studies
in science museum settings yielded percentage agreements of 81% (Dreef & Eriksson,
2007) and 92% (Van Beek, 2008). Matching kappas were, respectively, 0.63 and 0.81.
According to Sattler (2002), kappa values of 0.40 to 0.69 indicate fair to good agreement.
Studies in child care and development settings, in which an extended version of the EBS
was used,2 yielded average percentage agreements of 78% (Van Schijndel, Singer, Van der
Maas, & Raijmakers, in press) and 82% (Tiemersma & Van den Berg van Saparoea, 2007).
Matching kappas were 0.56 and 0.64. The test –retest reliability of the extended version of
the EBS was established in a child care and development setting: Correlations between two
Science Education

800

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

administrations of r = .53, p < .10 and r = .74, p < .01 have been found (Tiemersma &
Van den Berg Van Saparoea, 2007). It is typically expected that on average older children
show a higher level of exploratory behavior than younger children (Zaporozhets, 1970, as
cited in Forman & Kuschner, 2005). Therefore, a significant positive relation between EBS
level and age can be considered evidence for the validity of the EBS. In a child care and
development setting, a correlation of r = .43, p < .05 has been found between mean EBS
level (extended version) and age (Van Schijndel et al., in press).

A PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR
SCALE: THE EFFECT OF PARENTAL COACHING ON
PRESCHOOLERS’ HANDS-ON BEHAVIOR IN A SCIENCE CENTER
Exhibits in science center NEMO are designed for children from 6 years and older.
However, many families with children in the preschool age group visit NEMO. For this
age group, adult guidance is crucial to a successful visit. In several studies, the effects
of parent presence on children’s hands-on behavior have been demonstrated (Crowley
et al., 2001; Fender & Crowley, 2007). Crowley et al. (2001), for instance, found that 4- to
8-year-olds that engaged with an exhibit with their parents explored longer, broader, and
on a deeper level than children exploring with peers or by themselves. The researchers
concluded that the parent-guided group had more opportunity to learn than the other
groups of children. Parents are known to take on qualitatively different roles in interacting
with their children in science museums (Brown, 1995; Siegel et al., 2007). Therefore,
an important question is what characteristics of parent guidance contribute to children’s
optimal exploration of exhibits. Fender and Crowley (2007) investigated the effect of
one of those characteristics, parent explanation, on 3- to 8-year-olds’ hands-on behavior
at an exhibit. Explanation was defined as talk that highlighted causal relations or talk
that connected the exhibit to the child’s prior knowledge. In line with their hypothesis that
parent explanation does not provide children with procedural assistance, the researchers did
not find differences in exploratory behavior between children whose parents did explain
and children whose parents did not explain. In the present study, the question which
aspects of parent guidance influence preschoolers’ exploration of exhibits has been further
investigated.
The aim of the study was to optimize parent guidance to improve preschoolers’ exploration of exhibits in science center NEMO. Hence, in Experiment 1 we investigated which
coaching style resulted in the highest level of exploratory behavior at two exhibits. As
observational studies are informative, but not conclusive, the parental roles were performed
by trained test leaders and children were randomly assigned to a test leader and coaching
style. On the basis of the results of Experiment 1, an instructional video was made to inform
parents about effective ways of coaching preschoolers in a science museum. Experiment 2
was performed with parents who visited NEMO with their preschoolers. Half of the adults
were shown the instructional video, and the effect of informing parents on their children’s exploratory behavior was determined. In both experiments, the exhibits Rolling,
Rolling, Rolling (see Figure 1A) and Spinning Forces (see Figure 1B) were used. These
exhibits were chosen because unlike most exhibits in science center NEMO, they were
suitable for the age range of the children that participated in the study. Rolling, Rolling,
Rolling and Spinning Forces provided ample opportunities for hands-on behavior, exploratory behavior and adult guidance of the child’s behavior. In addition, a pilot study
demonstrated that preschoolers were attracted to the exhibits and physically capable of
operating them.
Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

801

Experiment 1: The Effect of Different Coaching Styles on Preschoolers’
Exploratory Behavior
Participants and Procedure. Seventy-one 4- to 6-year-olds (38 girls, 33 boys, M =

61 months, SD = 7) participated in the experiment. They visited science center NEMO
during closing hours with their preschool class. Each child was assigned to one of three
test leaders and one of three coaching styles in a random manner, counterbalancing age
and gender between the test leaders and coaching styles. The test leader accompanied
the individual child to two exhibits, Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning Forces, and the
child was asked to play at the exhibits by oneself.3 The test leader coached the child in one
of the three styles she was trained in: the scaffolding, explaining, or minimal style. When
using the scaffolding coaching style, the test leader tried to take the child’s investigations
to the next level by asking open questions, by acting like she did not understand what was
going on, and by directing the child’s attention to specific parts of the exhibit. In addition,
she challenged the child to verbalize his or her thoughts. For example, at the exhibit Rolling,
Rolling, Rolling she could ask: “Does the one on this track go as fast as the one on that
track? How is that possible?” When using the explaining coaching style, the test leader gave
the child explanation about the exhibit; she named causal connections, explained physical
principles underlying the exhibit, and connected the experience to the existing knowledge
of the child. In addition, she demonstrated the workings of the exhibit. For example, at the
exhibit Rolling, Rolling, Rolling, she could say: “The one on this track goes faster, because
this track is smoother than the other track.” The minimal coaching style served as the control
condition in this experiment. Nothing was explained or demonstrated, and no scaffolding
took place. When necessary, the test leader encouraged the child to continue playing by
making remarks such as “This is a nice game, isn’t it?” Independent of the coaching style,
the child was encouraged to keep playing at each exhibit for 5 minutes. Two observers
were trained to score children’s behavior by means of the EBS. The training consisted of
observing and describing preschoolers’ behavior at Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning
forces and discussing which EBS levels should be assigned to specific behaviors. The
observers assessed one child at the time. Per time interval the highest level of exploratory
behavior that a child demonstrated within the interval was noted. For Rolling, Rolling,
Rolling the used time interval was 30 seconds and for Spinning Forces this was 15 seconds.4
To determine the interobserver reliability, 20% of time intervals was double scored. The
interobserver reliability proved to be good: a percentage agreement of 93, kappa = 0.79
was found.
Statistical Approach. To compare children’s exploratory behavior at the two exhibits a

multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance was conducted with exhibit (Rolling,
Rolling, Rolling and Spinning forces) as within subjects factor on the following three
outcome measures: number of seconds a child showed EBS Level 1 behavior, EBS
Level 2 behavior and EBS Level 3 behavior.5 To investigate the effects of the different
3

The order in which the child and test leader visited the exhibits was not counterbalanced.
Time intervals of different lengths have been used at the two exhibits. The length of the intervals
was determined on the basis of the time it took to execute EBS Level 3 behavior at the exhibits. As
(nonsystematic) pilot observations showed that children needed more time to demonstrate EBS Level 3
behavior at Rolling, Rolling, Rolling than at Spinning Forces, it was decided to use larger time intervals at
the former exhibit than at the latter exhibit.
5
The dependent variables in the reported analyses of both experiments are based on the number of
seconds instead of the number of intervals that behavior of a particular EBS level was shown at the exhibits.
The number of seconds was obtained by multiplication of the number of intervals with the number of
4

Science Education

802

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

Figure 2. Experiment 1: Mean number of seconds that EBS Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 behavior was shown at
the exhibit Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning Forces. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

coaching styles, for each exhibit separately a factorial multivariate analysis of variance was
performed with coaching style (scaffolding, explaining, and minimal style), gender (boy,
girl), and test leader (Test Leader 1, Test Leader 2, and Test Leader 3) as between subjects
factors on the same three outcome measures. The between subjects factor test leader was
included in the analyses as a control factor to check whether possible effects of coaching
style were not explained by differences between test leaders. Post hoc tests with Bonferroni
corrections were used to further explore found effects.
Results. It was found that children’s behavior at the two exhibits differed: the exhibit
Rolling, Rolling, Rolling elicited more active manipulation (EBS Level 2; F (1,70) =
5.10, p < .05), whereas the exhibit Spinning Forces elicited more passive contact (EBS
Level 1; F (1,70) = 25.68 p < .001; see Figure 2).6 Owing to the differences between the
exhibits, at each exhibit a different coaching style resulted in the longest period of highlevel exploratory behavior. At Rolling, Rolling, Rolling, children showed more exploratory
behavior (EBS Level 3) when they were coached with the minimal style, compared to the
explaining style (F (2,53) = 7.66, p < .01; t(23.32) = 4.14, p < .001; see Figure 3A).
Apparently, children immediately start playing at the exhibit and reached high levels of
exploratory behavior by themselves. The adult’s explanation only seemed to interfere with
seconds within a time interval. The number of seconds informs the reader about the respective holding
times at each level of exploratory behavior for the different groups at Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning
Forces. Note, however, that as a result of the interval scoring, one cannot assume that when in the paper
mentioning is made of a (mean) number of seconds that behavior on a particular EBS level was shown, the
child demonstrated this behavior each and every second.
6
The choice to use dependent measures based on seconds enabled comparison of the two exhibits with
regard to the level of exploratory behavior that they elicit. However, differences in exploratory behavior
between exhibits have to be interpreted with care; it has to be kept in mind that the dependent measures
used at Rolling, Rolling, Rolling were based on longer time intervals than the dependent measures used at
Spinning Forces. Nevertheless, we do not expect the differences between the exhibits that were found in
both experiments to be a result of the use of intervals of different lengths. Differences were found in the
amount of EBS Level 1 and EBS Level 2 behavior the exhibits elicited. Because of the short period of time
that is needed to execute EBS Level 2 behavior, it is unlikely that the relatively short-time interval that was
used at Spinning Forces caused less EBS Level 2 behavior to be scored at the exhibit than when a longer
time interval would have been used.

Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

803

Figure 3. Experiment 1: Mean number of seconds that EBS Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 behavior was shown by
the children coached with the scaffolding, explaining and minimal coaching style at the exhibits Rolling, Rolling,
Rolling (A) and Spinning Forces (B). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

their investigations. At Spinning Forces, children showed more active manipulation (EBS
Level 2) when they were coached with the scaffolding style compared to the explaining
style (F (2,53) = 3.84, p < .05); t(46) = 3.73, p < .01) and more exploratory behavior
(EBS Level 3) when they were coached with the explaining style compared to the other two
coaching styles (F (2,53) = 8.73, p < .01; scaffolding t(24.96) = 3.25, p < .01; minimal
t(24.10) = 3.35, p < .01; see Figure 3B). Apparently, children did not immediately start
playing at the exhibit. They relied on the adult’s explanation and demonstration to figure
out what could be investigated at the exhibit and how to do that.
At Rolling, Rolling, Rolling, no differences between boys and girls were found. At
Spinning Forces, girls were found to show more exploratory behavior (EBS Level 3)
than boys when coached with the explaining style, but this was a marginal difference
(F (2,53) = 3.61, p < .05).
At Rolling, Rolling, Rolling, it was found that Test Leader 2 observed more passive
contact (EBS Level 1) than Test Leader 1 (F (2,53) = 3.96, p < .05; t(34.47) = −2.65,
p < .05). However, no interaction between test leader and coaching style was found. Hence,
this effect was not expected to influence the results with regard to coaching style as each test
leader had performed each coaching style equally often. At Spinning Forces, no differences
between the test leaders were found.
Experiment 1 was performed in a relatively controlled situation; children were observed
during closing hours of NEMO, and parental rolls were played by trained test leaders.
Experiment 2 was designed to investigate the possibility of optimizing parent guidance in a
natural setting. Therefore, this experiment was performed during opening hours of NEMO
and children were coached by their parents.
Experiment 2: The Effect of Informing Parents About Effective
Coaching on Preschoolers’ Exploratory Behavior
Participants and Procedure. Seventy-five 4- to 5-year-olds (31 girls, 44 boys, M =

67 months, SD = 9) participated in this experiment together with a parent (49 female,
26 male). The sample was representative of the museum population, which is predominantly
Caucasian and middle to upper class. Parental education was high: 5 parents had low,
19 had middle, and 49 had a high educational level (educational levels were available
for 73 parents). The parent –child pairs visited science center NEMO during opening
hours. Parent –child pairs were assigned to the informed or uninformed condition in a

Science Education

804

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

random manner, counterbalancing age and gender of the child over the two conditions.
Parents in the informed condition were shown the 7-minute video: “How to stimulate
your preschooler to exploratory behavior in NEMO.” This video was made on the basis
of the results of Experiment 1. The film started with a short introduction about science
center NEMO, after which an explanation of the exhibits Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and
Spinning Forces followed. Next, parents were advised how to stimulate their preschooler
to engage in exploratory behavior on the basis of three steps: getting to know the material,
investigating, and drawing conclusions. The advice in the video contained elements of
all three coaching styles that had been used in Experiment 1, the scaffolding, explaining,
and minimal style, and was demonstrated through carefully selected video fragments of
parent –child pairs playing at Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning Forces. Parents in both
conditions (informed and uninformed) were asked to visit the exhibits Rolling, Rolling,
Rolling and Spinning Forces with their child. Trained observers (who also participated in
Experiment 1) recognized participants by badges on their shirts and children’s hands-on
behavior was scored with the EBS. As in Experiment 1, the observers assessed one child at
the time. Per time interval the highest level of exploratory behavior that a child demonstrated
within the interval was noted. For Spinning Forces, the used time interval was 15 seconds
and for Rolling, Rolling, Rolling this was 40 seconds.4 The interobserver reliability proved
to be good: A percentage agreement of 91, kappa = 0.83, was found.
Statistical Approach. To compare children’s exploratory behavior at the two exhibits, a
multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance was conducted with exhibit (Rolling,
Rolling, Rolling and Spinning Forces) as within subjects factor on the following three
outcome measures: number of seconds a child showed EBS Level 1 behavior, EBS Level 2
behavior, and EBS Level 3 behavior.5 To investigate the effects of informing parents about
an effective coaching style, for each exhibit separately a multivariate analysis of variance
was performed with condition (informed, uninformed) and gender (boy, girl) as between
subjects factors on the three same outcome measures.
Results. With regard to the differences between exhibits, the results of Experiment 1
were replicated: the exhibit Rolling, Rolling, Rolling elicited more active manipulation
(EBS Level 2; F (1, 74) = 69.10, p < .001), whereas the exhibit Spinning Forces elicited
more passive contact (EBS Level 1; F (1, 74) = 13.09 p < .01; see Figure 4).6 At both
exhibits an effect of informing parents about effective coaching was found. At Rolling,
Rolling, Rolling, children whose parents had seen the instruction video showed more active
manipulation (EBS Level 2; F (1,71) = 8.96, p < .01) and exploratory behavior (EBS
Level 3; F (1,71) = 5.02, p < .05) than children whose parents had not seen the video (see
Figure 5A). At Spinning Forces, children whose parents had seen the instruction video
showed more active manipulation (EBS Level 2) than children whose parents had not seen
the video (F (1, 71) = 5.39, p < .05; see Figure 5B). These results show that informing
parents about an effective coaching style by means of a short instruction video has a
positive effect on children’s exploratory behavior; at both exhibits children of informed
parents showed more high-level exploratory behavior. No differences between boys and
girls were found at both exhibits.

DISCUSSION
In this paper, we introduced the EBS, a quantitative measure of young children’s handson behavior. The EBS consists of three levels of increasingly extensive exploration of
Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

805

Figure 4. Experiment 2: Mean number of seconds that EBS Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 behavior was shown at
the exhibits Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning Forces. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

the physical environment. The EBS has been developed for the preschool age group.
Preschoolers are a relatively new visitor group in science museums. However, teaching
science to preschoolers is in accordance with young children’s intrinsic motivation to
explore the world around them and preschoolers can, to a certain extent, reason scientifically
(Eshach & Fried, 2005; French, 2004; Gelman & Brenneman, 2004; Greenes, Ginsburg, &
Balfanz, 2004). As science museums increasingly emphasize their educational role (RameyGassert et al., 1994; St. John & Perry, 1993, as cited in Dierking & Falk, 1994), there is a
great demand for research concerning visitor behavior and learning. Few studies have been
published that focus specifically on the preschool age group’s science museum experiences.
As the EBS enables quantification of preschoolers’ exploratory behavior at exhibits, it can
serve as a useful instrument for generating knowledge about young children’s behavior
at science museums. The study that was reported in this paper stressed the importance
of parent guidance of preschoolers’ exploration of exhibits. Another important result for
science museums is the fact that parent guidance can be influenced in a positive way with
little time investment. Children that were guided by parents who had watched a 7-minute
instruction video showed more high-level exploratory behavior that children whose parents
had not watched the video. In this study, we offered parents advice with regard to structuring

Figure 5. Experiment 2: Mean number of seconds that EBS Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 behavior was shown by
the informed and uninformed group at the exhibits Rolling, Rolling, Rolling (A) and Spinning Forces (B). Error
bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

Science Education

806

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

the exploration process of their child by dividing it into three steps. At each step in the
exploration process, they were shown examples on how to stimulate their preschooler’s
exploratory behavior. For example, at the second step, investigating, they were encouraged
ask open questions to direct the child’s attention to another part of the exhibit and at the
third step, drawing conclusions, they were encouraged to let their child summarize what
he or she had discovered.
The EBS has several advantages compared to other measures of interactivity that have
been used to measure visitor behavior in science museums. Regarding its level of detail, the
EBS stands between existing global measures of interactivity and more detailed measures.
Existing global measures of interactivity, such as holding times or interaction times, do not
distinguish between exploratory behaviors of different quality. The EBS, on the other hand,
gives information about the relative level on which the hands-on behavior takes place. For
instance, in the study described in this paper, it was found that the two exhibits differed in
the amount of passive contact and active manipulation they elicited, whereas the effects of
adult guidance were visible in the amount of active manipulation and exploratory behavior
the children demonstrated. In comparison to existing detailed measures of interactivity, such
as the measure applied by Crowley et al. (2001) and Fender and Crowley (2007), the EBS
has the advantage of being applicable in different museum settings and therefore enabling
comparisons between different exhibits or exhibitions. In addition, the EBS not only allows
for anticipated behavior to be coded but also unanticipated behavior can be quantified. For
instance, the exhibit Rolling, Rolling, Rolling in NEMO is developed to investigate whether
the weight of a cylinder (gravity) and the covering of a track (friction resistance) have an
effect on the speed of a cylinder when it rolls down the ramp. We expected children to vary
their actions by using cylinders of different weights and tracks with different coverings.
Children did show the expected behavior, but, in addition, they demonstrated unanticipated
behavior that seemed related to their own research questions. For instance, several children
not only rolled cylinders down the ramp but also tried rolling cylinders up the ramp. They
varied the force they exerted on the cylinders and used cylinders of different weights. By
using the EBS, this unanticipated high-level exploratory behavior was taken into account
in the description of the exhibit.
The EBS is an observational measure. The use of observations as a method for studying
visitor behavior has apparent advantages. Observations are considered unobtrusive (Falk,
1982, as cited in Sandifer, 1997; Serrel, 1998) and as young children are easily influenced
by more obtrusive methods, such as think aloud protocols, tests of surveys (Bronson, 1994;
Ginsburg & Golbeck, 2004), observations can be considered a suitable method for assessing
the young age group. A second advantage of observations is that they do not rely on visitors’
language use. This is especially important when studying preschoolers, as their verbal
utterances cannot be considered an accurate reflection of their level of reasoning. However,
the choice for using observations does also bring about certain methodological challenges.
One of the challenges is balancing the amount of detail in the observation scale with the
practicality of the scale. For a measure to be applicable in different settings, it is necessary to
maintain a certain amount of freedom to interpret visitor behavior. However, this freedom
must not affect interobserver reliability. For the EBS, sufficient interobserver reliability
was obtained with observer trainings of reasonable lengths. Another challenge when using
observational measures in science museums is dealing with the physical dissimilarities
between exhibits. Observational measures making use of interval scoring require decisions
on the length of the time intervals; intervals must be long enough to allow for the behavior of
interest to take place within the interval but short enough to allow for a reasonable amount
of observations. When comparing exhibits, an important question is whether intervals of
different lengths should be used. With regard to the use of the EBS, the amount of time that
Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

807

is necessary to execute EBS Level 3 behavior depends on the specific exhibit. In the study
that was described in this paper, for this reason time intervals of different lengths were
used for the exhibits Rolling, Rolling, Rolling and Spinning Forces. The question whether
to take into account physical dissimilarities between exhibits applies not only to measures
making use of interval scoring but to all quantitative observational measures. For instance,
holding times and interaction times are also influenced by the physical characteristics of
exhibits. It is important to be aware of this issue when comparing exhibits with quantitative
observational measures.
The EBS has many possible uses in the field of visitor research. As was shown in
this paper, the EBS enables answering questions with regard to the level of exploratory
behavior different exhibits elicit. In addition, it was shown that the EBS can be used to
assess effects of different factors on preschoolers’ interaction with exhibits. In this paper,
the effects of adult guidance were investigated, but other possible factors are the presence
of other visitors or the manner in which information about exhibits is conveyed. Besides
these topics, another important issue that could be investigated by using the EBS is the
relationship between preschoolers’ interactivity and learning.7 Behavioral measures have
often been associated with learning. For instance, holding times have been suggested to
equal the amount of learning taking place (Serrell, 1998; Smith, 1990, as cited in RameyGassert et al., 1994). Few studies, however, have provided evidence for this claim (Sandifer,
1997) and, in spite of the emphasis on hand-on experiences in preschoolers’ science learning
(French, 2004; Gelman & Brenneman, 2004; Neuman, 1971), none of these studies has
been directed at the preschool visitor group. As children are inefficient in their exploration
of evidence (e.g., Schauble, 1996), the relationship between interactivity and learning is
less straightforward for the preschool visitor group than for older visitor groups. Therefore,
a behavioral measure that takes into account the quality of the interaction, such as the EBS,
is more suitable for investigating the relationship between interactivity and learning than
measures that do not take into account the quality of the interaction, such as holding times
or interaction times. When a child plays on a high EBS level, he or she generates exemplars
of exhibit-specific phenomena. If the child will learn about the underlying principles of the
exhibit from these phenomena, is a question open for investigation. Playing on a high EBS
level does imply practicing process skills, such as observation and systematic manipulation,
which are considered crucial in preschool science learning (Ginsburg & Golbeck, 2004;
Wasserman, 1988).
Quantification of behavior, as is done by means of the EBS, enables comparison between situations, but does lead to a loss of information. Ethnographical studies on visitors’
hands-on behavior, such as the study of Meisner et al. (2007), generate richer and more detailed descriptions of behavior than studies in which quantitative approaches are adopted.
Therefore, we recommend the EBS be used in combination with other measures. This
recommendation is in line with the advice of Brody et al. (2008) for the use of a variety in research methodologies and data acquisition methods in assessing informal science
learning. In terms of the overview of methodologies and methods Brody et al. (2008) propose, the EBS is typically used when adopting descriptive, correlational, or experimental
research methodologies. These methodologies could complement ethnographical or case
study methodologies. The data acquisition method of the EBS, observation, could also be
paired with other data acquisition methods, such as interviews or surveys. This combining
7
In this discussion, we focus on cognitive learning outcomes (Brody et al., 2008) as a result of a visit
to a science museum. Although we do acknowledge the importance of affective learning outcomes (Brody
et al., 2008), such as the development of curiosity, interest, positive feelings, and attitudes, discussing those
would go beyond the scope of this paper.

Science Education

808

VAN SCHIJNDEL ET AL.

of methodologies and methods could result in a better view of children’s interactivity in
science museums.
We would like to thank children and parents for their enthusiasm in participating in the studies. Special
thanks to the children and parents who were featured in the instructional video. We thank students and
student assistants Lineke van Beek, Karin den Hartog, Linda Heuft, Mirjam Provoost, and Marian
Trap for their help in collecting the data. We thank Joris Smaling, Ruben Bulsink en Jomme Keller
for their assistance in making the instructional video. We would like to express appreciation to Nico
Notebaart and René van de Belt for their audiovisual advice and technical support. We thank Dorothy
Mandell and Bianca van Bers for comments on an earlier draft of the paper. Finally, we would like to
thank Wouter Weeda for statistical advice.

REFERENCES
Afonso, A. S., & Gilbert, J. K. (2007). Educational value of different types of exhibits in an interactive science
and technology center. Science Education, 91(6), 967 – 987.
Allen, S. (2004). Designs for learning: studying science museum exhibits that do more than entertain. Science
Education, 88(1), 17 – 33.
Ash, D. (2003). Dialogic inquiry in life science conversations of family groups in a museum. Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, 40(2), 138 – 162.
Belsky, J., Goode, M. K., & Most, R. K. (1980). Maternal stimulation and infant exploratory competence:
Cross-sectional, correlational and experimental analyses. Child Development, 51, 1163 – 1178.
Boisvert, D. L., & Slez, B. J. (1994). The relationship between visitor characteristics and learning-associated
behaviors in a science museum discovery space. Science Education, 79, 503 – 518.
Boisvert, D. L., & Slez, B. J. (1995). The relationship between exhibit characteristics and learning-associated
behaviors in a science museum discovery space. Science Education, 78, 137 – 148.
Brody, M., Bangert, A., & Dillon, J. (2008). Assessing learning in informal science contexts. Paper commissioned
by the U.S. National Research Council for Science Learning in Informal Environments Committee. Retrieved
January 15, 2009, from http://www7.nationalacademies.org/bose/Brody Commissioned Paper.pdf.
Bronson, M. B. (1994). The usefulness of an observational measure of young children’s social and mastery
behaviors in early childhood classrooms. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 9, 19 – 43.
Brown, C. (1995). Making the most of family visits: Some observations of parents with children in a museum
science centre. Museum Management and Curatorship, 14(1), 65 – 71.
Crowley, K., Callanan, M. A., Jipson, J. L., Galco, J., Topping, K., & Shrager, J. (2001). Shared scientific thinking
in everyday parent – child interaction. Science Education, 85(6), 712 – 732.
Dierking, L. D., & Falk, J. H. (1994). Family behavior and learning in informal science settings: A review of the
research. Science Education, 78(1), 57 – 72.
Dunn, L., Kontos, S., & Potter, L. (1996). Mixed age interactions in family child care. Early Education and
Development, 7(4), 349 – 366.
Dreef, T., & Eriksson, S. (2007). Onderzoekend spel bij kleuters in science center NEMO [Preschoolers’ exploratory play in science center NEMO]. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
Eshach, H., & Fried, M. N. (2005). Should science be taught in early childhood? Journal of Science Education
and Technology, 14(3), 315 – 336.
Fender, J. G., & Crowley, K. (2007). How parent explanation changes what children learn from everyday scientific
thinking. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 28, 189 – 210.
Forman, G. E., & Kuschner, D. S. (2005). The child’s construction of knowledge: Piaget for teaching children.
Amherst, MA: Perfomanetics Press.
Fortner-Wood, C., & Henderson, B. B. (1997). Individual differences in two-year-olds’ curiosity in the assessment
setting and in the grocery store. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 158(4), 495 – 497.
French, L. (2004). Science as the center of a coherent, integrated early childhood curriculum. Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 19(1), 150 – 158.
Gelman, R., & Brenneman, K. (2004). Science learning pathways for young children. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 19, 138 – 149.
Gifford, S. (2004). A new mathematics pedagogy for the early years: in search of principles for practice. International Journal of Early Years Education, 12(2), 99 – 115.
Ginsburg, H. P., & Golbeck, S. L. (2004). Thoughts on the future of mathematics and science learning and
education. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 19, 190 – 200.

Science Education

EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR SCALE

809

Greenes, C., Ginsburg, H. P., & Balfanz, R. (2004). Big math for little kids. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
19, 159 – 166.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1964). The early growth of logic in the child. New York: Harper & Row.
Jennings, K. D., Harmon, R. J. Morgan, G. A., Gaiter, J. L., & Yarrow, L. J. (1979). Exploratory play as an
index of mastery motivation: Relationships to persistence, cognitive functioning and environmental measures.
Developmental Psychology, 15(4), 386 – 394.
Lindahl, M., & Pramling Samuelsson, I. (2002). Imitation and variation: reflections on toddlers’ strategies for
learning. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 46(1), 25 – 45.
McManus, P. M. (1987). It’s the company you keep. . . The social determination of Learning-related behavior in
a science museum. International Journal of Museum Management and Curatorship, 6, 263 – 270.
Meisner, R., Vom Lehn, D., Heath, C., Burch, A., Gammon, B., & Reisman, M. (2007). Exhibiting performance:
Co-participation in science centres and museums. International Journal of Science Education, 29(12), 1531 –
1555.
Neuman, D. (1971). Sciencing, an activity for young children. Education, 91(4), 292 – 297.
Ramey-Gassert, L., Walberg, H. J., III, & Walberg, H. J. (1994). Reexamining connections: Museums as science
learning environments. Science Education, 78(4), 345 – 363.
Rubenstein, J., & Howes, C. (1979). Caregiving and infant behavior in day care and in homes. Developmental
Psychology, 15, 1 – 24.
Rusher, A. S., Cross, D. R., & Ware, A. M. (1995). Infant and toddler play: Assessment of exploratory style and
development level. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 10, 297 – 315.
Sandifer, C. (1997). Time-based behaviors at an interactive science museum: Exploring the differences between
weekday/weekend and family/nonfamily visitors. Science Education, 81, 689 – 701.
Sandifer, C. (2003). Technological novelty and open-endedness: Two characteristics of interactive exhibits that
contribute to the holding of visitor attention in a science museum. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
40(2), 121 – 137.
Sattler, J. M. (2002). Assessment of behavior by observational methods: Part 2. In J. M. Sattler (Ed.), Assessment
of children: Behavioral and clinical applications (4th ed, pp. 120 – 162). San Diego, CA: Jerome M. Sattler.
Schauble, L. (1996). The development of scientific reasoning in knowledge-rich contexts. Developmental Psychology, 32, 102 – 119.
Serrell, B. (1998). Paying attention: Visitors and museum exhibitions. Washington, DC: American Association of
Museums.
Siegel, D., Esterly, J., Callanan, M. A., Wright, R., & Navarro, R. (2007). Conversations about science across
contexts in Mexican-descent families. International Journal of Science Education, 29(12), 1447 – 1466.
Singer, E. (2002). The logic of young children’s (nonverbal) behavior. European Early Childhood Education
Research Association Journal, 10, 55 – 64.
Smilansky, S. (1968). The effects of sociodramatic play on disadvantaged preschool children. New York: Wiley.
Sutton-Smith, B. (1975). The useless made useful: Play as variability training. The School Review, 83(2), 197 –
214.
Tiemersma, J., & Van den Berg Van Saparoea, B. M. (2007). Onderzoekend gedrag van kinderen stimuleren
met een uitdagende buitenruimte [Stimulating children’s exploratory behavior with a challenging outside play
area]. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Tunnicliffe, S. D. (2000). Conversations of family and primary school groups at robotic dinosaur exhibits in a
museum: What do they talk about? International Journal of Science Education, 22(7), 739 – 754.
Van Beek, L. (2008). De invloed van coaching op het onderzoekend spel van kleuters in science center NEMO
[The influence of coaching on preschoolers’ exploratory play in science center NEMO]. Unpublished master’s
thesis, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Van Schijndel, T. J. P., Singer, E., & Raijmakers, M. E. J. (2007). De Exploratief Spel Schaal [The Exploratory
Play Scale] (Tech. Rep.). Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
Van Schijndel, T. J. P., Singer, E., Van der Maas, H. L. J., & Raijmakers, M. E. J. (in press). The effects of a
sciencing program on young children’s exploratory play in the sandpit. European Journal of Developmental
Psychology.
Wasserman, S. (1988). Play-debrief-replay: An instructional model for science. Childhood Education, 2, 232 – 234.
Weisler, A., & Mc Call, R. B. (1976). Exploration and play: Résumé and redirection. American Psychologist, 31,
492 – 508.

Science Education

