The Use of Time as a Measure of Visitor Behavior and Exhibit Effectiveness
Author(s): John H. Falk
Source: Roundtable Reports , 1982, Vol. 7, No. 4, Issues in Research: Language and
Methodology (1982), pp. 10-13
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/40479747
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Taylor & Francis, Ltd. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Roundtable Reports

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:24:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

10

The Use of Time as a Measure of
Visitor Behavior and Exhibit
Effectiveness

Currently, there are abundant data on how the average
museum visitor spends his time. These data were perhaps
Parking meters, appointments, bus schedules, and lunch
best summarized by Laetsch (in press), who stated that the
hours; hunger, mental fatigue, and physical exhaustionaverage
visitor spends no more than two hours in a muthe duration of a museum visit is related to a varietyseum,
of
nearly three-quarters of this time is spent in walking
factors that we all realize, but often seem to forget. The
around or visiting the bathrooms, gift shop, or cafeteria.
time a visitor spends is more than seconds, minutes, and
During the roughly thirty minutes the visitor actually
hours; it is a measure of constraints, needs, and values.spends attending to exhibits, he will, at most, spend thirty
to forth seconds looking at any particular exhibit. These
The allocation of this valuable commodity is a useful barometer to the visitor's underlying interests, motivations,
"facts" are now generally accepted by the museum world
satisfactions, and dislikes. Time is perhaps not coincidentaland presumably are being heeded in the design and pre-

by John H. Falk

ly, the single measure most frequently used for evaluatingsentation of new exhibitions. But are these "facts" accurate? A closer analysis suggests that although the data colexhibits(s) quality/effectiveness and assessing visitor behavior - the time spent in an exhibit, the time spent in an exlected may be correct, poor choice of statistics used in their

hibition hall, the time spent in a museum. Time, as a reanalysis often leads to erroneous conclusions. Specifically,
the crux of the problem lies in using an arithmetic mean
search variable, is easy to measure, essentially objective,

as the best "summarizer" of the data.
and theoretically non-trivial. In this paper, I will: 1) review

the previous uses of time as a museum evaluation par-

A Closer Analysis

ameter and suggest some new perspectives on using time
Figures 1,2, and 3 represent three fairly typical sets of data.
as a measure in evaluation studies; and 2) look at time
Figure 1 (adapted from Diamond, 1980) shows the duration
metaphorically as a device for understanding museum visitor behavior.

Literature Review
The set of literature concerned with studies of visitor be-

of exhibit interaction as a function of the percent of exhibits visited at two science museums. Figure 2 (Falk, unpub60

havior and exhibit effectiveness, and the set utilizing time
54
as a primary measure, are almost totally overlapping. In
one of the earliest systematic studies, Robinson (1928)
coined the term "holding power" to refer to the average

- ^^^|

48 - ^^H

time visitors devoted to exhibits in an art museum. This

2 42 • ^^^|

term and technique are still used today. Melton (1933,
1936, 1972) and Melton, Feldman, and Mason (1936)ualso
36 - ^^H
£ ^^^^H
did pioneering work with time as a dependent measure.
x 30 Using time lapse photography, Nielsen (1946) discovered
LU ^^^^^H
that visitors to the Museum of Science and Industry in
g 24 - ^^M
Chicago tended not to view exhibits in proper sequence

^^H

and stayed a maximum of thirty seconds in front of any

18 - ^^^^^^^H

given exhibit. Bechtel (1967) used time to assess the exhibit
preference of visitors. Not surprisingly, he found that visit-

12 - ^^^^^^^^^^^

ors spent more time with exhibits they liked. Falk (in review) demonstrated that time, along with observable nonverbal behaviors, could be used to accurately predict learning in a museum. Some other investigators using time as a
0
1
2
3
4
5
>5
dependent measure were Shettel (1973), Screven (1974),
TIME (MINUTES)
Lakota (1975), Brown (1979), Alt (1979), and Riddle (1980).
figure i.
Time has also played a role in the assessment of visitor
The mean frequencies of different durations of exhibit inte

behavior in "naturalistic" visitor research (Wolf and Tymitz,
actions at the Exploratorium and Lawrence Hall of Science a
1979; Gottfried, 1979; Rosenfeld, 1980; Diamond, 1980)
a function of the percentage of total exhibits visited by an

and survey research (Elliot and Loomis, 1973; Borun,individual.
1977).

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:24:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Museum Education Roundtable Roundtable Reports, Vol. 7, No. 4 11

first step inspent
handling manipulating
time data should be to plot
lished data) represents the timeThe
visitors
the frequency
distribution Biology,
(Figs. 1-3). If the British
distribution is
one specific exhibit in the Hall
of Human
generally
(bell-shaped),
then a meanrepreis an appropriMuseum (Natural History). Figure
3 normal
(Falk,
in review)
summarizing
statistic,
and standard statistical
analyses,
sents a different population ate
of
visitors
interacting
with
a
different exhibit located in the same hall. The arithmetic

which presuppose a normal distribution, can be used. If,
as is likely, the distribution is essentially bimodal, the mean
mean of the data in Figure 1 falls in the one minute durais an inappropriate statistic and a first step would be to caltion class (1.5 min.); the mean does not accurately reflect
culate the two modes. A bimodal distribution, however,
the behavior of the majority of the public sampled. Most
usually implies that more than a single population is reprevisitors spent very little time (less than a minute), while
sented by the data and some procedure is required to
other visitors spent considerably longer periods at exhibits.
these populations before further analysis can be
The populations represented in Figures 2 and 3 provide separate
an
The standard procedure is to divide the data at the
even more extreme example of the potential problems done.
of
or least frequently observed point; the resultusing the mean as the primary statistic for analysis. As"antimode,"
in

ing two groups can then be analyzed separately via a
Figure 1, the distributions are skewed and bimodal. Either
design (Kirk, 1968). Occasionally, though, one
people spent less than thirty seconds, or they tended "split-plot"
to
may wish to use time as an independent variable to help
spend much more time (in excess of 120-180 seconds).
illuminate other considerations, such as learning, where the
The mean time actually describes very few people. In both
time spent by the individuals in the middle of the distribuFigures 2 and 3, only 5% of the visitors actually spent
somewhere close to the mean amount of time at the exhition is of most importance and interest. Under these cirbit, roughly 60% spent considerably less than the mean cumstances, a transformation of the data may aid analysis.
amount of time, and about 33% considerably more time. One procedure is a logarithmic transformation that comThe " holding power" distributions for all three popula-pensates for the typical skewness of time data, and tends
tions follow the same basic form - bimodal.

to normalize the distribution by weighting longer time in-

What all these findings suggest is the rather commontervals more heavily. This procedure will not help strongsense proposition originally documented by Bechtel - ly bimodal data. In such cases, a sigmoid transformation
either people enjoy the exhibit (spend time) or not (do notwill be an appropriate procedure (Falk, in review). The
spend time). An average is really not useful information,main advantage of a sigmoid transformation is that it minisince virtually no one spends the average amount of timemizes the extremes and maximizes the importance of the
at an exhibit. How then, does one empirically deal with middle part of the distribution, generally deemphasizing
visitor time data, given that as previously stated, time is the impact on the analysis of the visitors who spend no
theoretically an important and useful measure of visitor time, and the ones who spend hours. As a consequence,
the response times of the visitors who spend somewhere
behavior and learning?
18 -

16 ^H

14 ^m

36 •

12

^H

^_

O ^| N = 63 ^m

28 Ì I

*

I

10

°

8

ce

m

^H

I

I

m

0

0 40 80 120 160 200 >200
: 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 150

figure ¿.

TIME (SECONDS)

Figure 3. TIME (SECONDS)

The time of interaction with an exhibit (on the inte

hormonal
and nervous systems) of 12-13 year
The time of interaction with an exhibit on hormones of
a
visiting
the
Hall of Human Biology, British Muse
random sample of general public visitors to the Hall of Human
Biology, British Museum (Natural History).

History).

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:24:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1 2 Museum Education Roundtable Roundtahle Reports, Vol . 7, No 4

between "zero" and "forever" at
an exhibit
areinto
highlighted.
"window
shoppers" can turn
"buyers." If these visitors
discover
one
or
more
exhibits
sufficiently
interesting,
The Museum/Department Store,
they will spend some of their time looking at exhibits in
Visitor/Shopper more
Metaphor
depth than they had originally planned, or perhaps
Up to this point, I have dealt with
as anote
quantitative,
they willtime
make a mental
to return to the museum
descriptive variable. I would now
like
time
again when
theyto
have consider
more time. Relating
this metaphor
more qualitatively. From the initially
stated
premise,
I
to the time data discussed
earlier,
most of the individuals
would argue that time is a primary
consideration
in short
planin a museum
are window shopping (left,
time, side
ning and actualizing a museum of
visitlack
of are
time,
Figs. 1-3);but
buyers,for
regardless
of origin,
a small but
visitors would stop at more exhibits,
visit(right,
more
galleries,
significant minority
long time,
side of Figs. 1-3).
and even come to the museum The
more
frequently.
In cannot
many
two metaphoric
"shopper" categories
be clearother life situations, money, rather
than
is the
limitly separated
by thetime,
graphs in Figs.
1 -3, however.
ing variable. Accordingly, I would propose a simple metaMore Metaphor
phor that is useful in understanding museum visitor beNo matter how much
a shopper
may
like to buy everyhavior. A museum is like a department
store
and
museum
thing
in
the
store,
he
probably
does
not
possess the revisitors are like shoppers- the emphasis is on primary
sources to do of
so. Heother
will limit his
purchases to some
forces and does not deny the existence
factors.
In subset
of
the
items
available.
Quite
analogously,
the
museum visa retail store, a customer's monetary resources, in large
itor
may
wish
to
see
in
depth
everything
in
the
museum,
measure, determine behavior; in a museum, time plays the
but
limited
time
(or
physiological
constraints
measurable
comparable primary role.
in time) prevents
this. Inthey
most museums,
a visitor
The "serious shoppers" know exactly
what
wish
to must
restrict
his
time
to
some
subset
of
the
museum.
Frequently,
buy. If Ms. Jones needs a new umbrella, she goes straight
this subsetexamining
does not neatly fit the
museum
staffs ideal for
to the umbrella department. After
the
various
a museum
visit.she
Can wewants,
ask some useful
questions
using
umbrellas available, she selects the
one
pays
for
the shopper/visitor
it, and departs. She does not stop
at themetaphor?
sale shoes or at
How
many museums
have one
made serious
efforts
to proraincoats, even though she may
need
a new
- all
she
vide proper
visitors?
How many
museums
is interested in is a new umbrella.
In orientation
much for
the
same
way,
arrange their
halls so that
the most important
exhibits (in
some museum visitors come with
a very
clear,
predeterterms of ideas
sell) are nearest
the entrance?
most
mined notion of what they wish
toto see.
It may
be Would
one
museums
even know
which ideas
put on "sale"? By
particular piece of sculpture, or the
new
exhibit
on toPleistoexhibits in theseor
terms,
perhaps museums
cene fossils; perhaps they have a thinking
class about
assignment
simply
could be more effective.

a longstanding interest. In any event, that is all they want
stores
typically
have thewill
same commodity
in varyto see and that is likely all theyRetail
will
see.
They
spend
ing qualities
prices in order
to maximize
sales. Do most
a great deal of time in front of
the and
single
exhibit
that
museums offer the same information at varying levels of
motivated their trip.
sophistication or do they mostly aim for some middle
Then there are the "window shoppers"- the endless
streams who never seem to buy anything. They touch the ground?
We should not overlook the social aspect of "window
merchandise, stroll the aisles, and read the price tags. They
shopping" (Laetsch, 1982). What can museums do to facilirarely come alone; window shopping is a social activity,
a pleasant way to pass time. Although they may not enter tate this aspect of the museum visit? Perhaps there is somethe store with the intention of spending money, if some- thing to be learned from the success of shopping malls?

Conclusion

thing nice strikes their, fancy, they buy. "Impulse buying"

is the merchant's delight, and provides the motivation for
investing in attractive displays and bargain counters. By

analogy, "window shoppers" are the people who have

Whether it is used quantitatively or metaphorically, tim

a valuable tool for understanding visitor motivation
behavior. It is easy to measure and manipulate; howe

come "to do" the museum. In this category, for example,
the use of overly simplistic statistics which might obsc
is the family who wakes up on Sunday and decides to go to the true nature of the data should be avoided. We must also

the museum. They do not know what is really in the remember that information on the time a visitor spends, by

museum, just that it would be a nice way to spend their
time. Also in this category are most tourists and lunch hour

visitors. Good displays and signage are essential with this
audience - how will they know otherwise where to go and
what to see? Typically, these visitors do not spend inordin-

ate lengths of time in any one area. They try to see as
much of the museum as they possibly can in the shortest
amount of time. Unlike retailers, though, many museum
workers cast aspersions on "window shoppers." However,

itself, is of little or no importance without an understanding
of the factors that contributed to that behavior.

/ am particularly grateful to M.B. Alt with whom the major
ideas for this paper were originally formulated. Also providing
significant comments and suggestions were f.D. Balling, f.
Diamond, LS.Z. Greenberg, f. Harms, D.D. Hilke, and E. Goldstein. As ever, I appreciate K. Severson 's help in preparing the
manuscript. A special thanks to E. Munyer for editorial comments and help in preparing the figures.

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:24:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Museum Education Roundtable Roundtable Reports, Vol. 7, No. 4 1 3
References

Melton, A.W. 1933. Some characteristics of museum visitors.

Alt, M.B. 19^9. Improving audio-visual presentations. Curator,
Psychological Bulletin, 30: 720-721.
22:85-95.
Melton, A.W. 1936. Distribution of attention in galleries in a
Bechtel, R.B. 1967. Hodometer research in museums. Museum museum of science and industry. Museum News, 14: 6-8.
News, 45: 23-26.
Melton, A.W. 1972. Visitor behavior in museums: Some early
Borun, M. 1977. Measuring the Immeasurable: A Pilot Study ofresearch in environmental design. Human Factors, 14: 393Museum Effectiveness. The Franklin Institute, Philadelphia,403.
PA.
Melton, A.W., N.G. Feldman, and C.W. Mason. 1936. ExperiBrown, W.S. 1979. The design of the informal environment. mental Studies of the Education of Children in a Museum
Gazette, 12:4-10.
of Science. New Series, No. 15. American Association of
Diamond, J. 1980. The ethology of teaching: A perspective from
Museums, Washington, D.C.
the observations of families in science centers. Ph.D. DisNielsen, L.C. 1946. A technique for studying the behavior of
sertation. Univ. of California, Berkeley.
museum visitors. Journal of Educational Psychology, 37:
Elliot, P., and R.J. Loomis. 1973. Studies of Visitor Behavior
103-110.
in Museums and Exhibitions. An Annotated Bibliography. Riddle, W. 1980. A study of adolescent visitors to the Human
Smithsonian Institution, Office of Museum Programs, WashBiology Exhibit. Masters Thesis. C.S.M.E., Chelsea College,
Univ. of London.
ington, D.C.
Robinson, E.S. 1928. The Behavior of the Museum Visitor. New
Falk, J.H. In review. Time and behavior as predictors of learning.
Science Education.
Series, No. 5. American Association of Museums, Washington, D.C.
Gottfried, J. 1979. A naturalistic study of children's behavior
during field trips to a free-choice learning environment.
Rosenfeld, S.B. 1980. Informal learning in zoos: Naturalistic
Ph.D. Dissertation. Univ. of California, Berkeley.
studies of family groups. Ph.D. Dissertation. Univ. of CaliLaetsch, W.M. 1982. Taking a measure of families. Roundtable
fornia, Berkeley.
Reports , 7(2): 3, 12-13.
Screven, C.G. 1974. The Measurement and Facilitation of
Laetsch, W.M. In press. An overview of research on museum
Learning in the Museum Environment: An Experimental
visitors. In: J. Glaser (ed.) Proceedings of Children inAnalysis.
Muse- Publications in Museum Behavior. Smithsonian Institution, Office of Museum Programs, Washington, D.C.
ums: An International Symposium. Smithsonian Institution,
Shettel, H.H. Exhibits: Art form or educational medium? Museum
Washington, D.C.
News, 52: 32-34.
Lakota, R.A. 1975. The National Museum of Natural History
as a Behavioral Environment, Part I. Smithsonian Institu-

Wolf, R.L., and B.L. Tymitz. 1979. Do Giraffes Ever Sit?: A
Study of Visitor Percpetions at the National Zoological
Kirk, R.E. 1968. Experimental Design: Procedures for the Be- Park. Smithsonian Institution, Office of Museum Programs,
tion, Office of Museum Programs, Washington, D.C.

havioral Sciences. Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., Belmont, CA. Washington, D.C.

Ethology in Museums:
Understanding the Learning Process
by Judy Diamond

We have evolved a unique pattern of learning in which

new information and experience is sought after throughout
While museums cannot provide a complete substitute forthe lifetime of the individual. We display an unusual range
the real world, they can help people - and children in par-of learning mechanisms. We learn through insight, associa-

ticular - to develop the desire and skills required for a tion, reasoning, conditioning, and empathy, and many
other ways. To discover and understand our environment,
direct perception of reality; they can provide guidance for
the recognition that the natural and man-made worlds we explore, anticipate, imitate, design, and experiment. We
everywhere constantly display interesting phenomena have what appears to be a pronounced need to learn and a
which any normal person can perceive with his senses. Ifdiversity of behaviors and cognitive processes with which
it is in the nature of our type of civilization that schoolsto achieve learning.
must devote more and more time to the teaching of ab- Museums, science centers, zoos, aquaria, and nature censtract concepts, then museums may have to take the educa- ters provide opportunities for acquiring direct experience
tional responsibility for helping people gain a more direct
with the characteristics of our world. Their complexity and
perception of the world.
richness can elicit the full range of their visitors' learning
-Rene Dubos, 1973
mechanisms. Diversity is a particular characteristic of
museum learning; it can range all the way from serendipity
Our tendency to explore and be curious about that which
to the acquisition of highly structured responses under
regimes of explicit reinforcement.
surrounds us is one of the most apparent characteristics
of our species. Humans play, manipulate objects, imitate
Many reports on learning in museums and museum-like
each other, experiment and teach with great persistence.
settings are based on intensive studies of highly limited

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:24:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

