Session 7: Workshop on Personalized Access
to Cultural Heritage: PATCH'20

UMAP ’20 Adjunct, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy

Tracking Museum Visitors
through Convolutional Object Detectors
Mauro Mezzini

Carla Limongelli

Department of Education
Roma Tre University
mauro.mezzini@uniroma3.it

Department of Engineering
Roma Tre University
carla.limongelli@uniroma3.it

Giuseppe Sansonetti

Carlo De Medio

Department of Engineering
Roma Tre University
gsansone@dia.uniroma3.it

Department of Engineering
Roma Tre University
carlo.demedio@uniroma3.it

ABSTRACT

1

Tracking museum visitors may provide useful insights about them,
thus enabling curators and personnel to better manage the flows
and the arrangement of the museum’s works and to develop a
recommender system as well. Tracking of visits in a museum environment is an expensive task if performed without automatic
tracking systems. For this reason, many automatic tracking systems are proposed in the research literature. However, some of them
are expensive (e.g., systems based on light detection and ranging
(LIDAR) technology), or require active collaboration from visitors
(e.g., systems based on wearable devices). In this work, we propose a
deep learning object detection approach to the problem of tracking
visitors. The proposed system can accurately detect specific objects
in videos, thus allowing for the careful measurement of the spatial
and temporal movements of a visitor in a museum scenario. The
system requires only off-the-shelf inexpensive devices and deep
learning models for object detection and recognition.

Thanks to web-based technologies, personalization can play an
increasingly crucial role in many application scenarios, such as
e-learning and cultural heritage (CH) services. Personalized learning and personalized tourist tours are two widely studied issues,
which have recently received great attention from the scientific
community (e.g., see [1, 2]). Both students and visitors explore a
knowledge domain: students sift through learning objects, whereas
visitors sift through museum artworks. Moreover, sifting is optimal
when the domain is sufficiently flexible and supports users’ needs
and requirements, namely, when the system can tailor its material
to each individual. In this contribution, we focus the attention on
the enhancement of the visitors’ experience during a museum visit
by providing a personalized visit. The visitor’s satisfaction depends
on the acquisition of new skills and insights, especially for those
who belong to disadvantaged social categories such as strangers
or low-instructed people. The general satisfaction depends also on
a pleasant visit that avoids crowded points. The realization of this
objective needs to gather information from the visitors without boring them with too many information requests. Data of interest are
the number of visitors, time and duration of their visits. Personal
data such as age, gender, education, and profession are necessary
to convey important information for understanding the cultural
offer. It is also important to know how long each visitor dedicates
to visit each artwork [3]. This information should be collected systematically and accurately to provide aggregate data (mean and
maximum values, frequencies, etc.) for a defined time. The knowledge of the number of visits, their duration, and their routes can
also reveal which artworks in the museum are points of attraction
and which are ignored or shortly observed [16]. Exploiting this
information, it is possible to offer the right insights to people interested in a given artwork or to stimulate the attention to a less
popular one, by also providing related material (e.g., books, images,
and videos) in a personalized form [17]. This work proposes a first
step in the aforementioned project that consists of an automatic
detection system for museum visits based on image detection and
identification techniques through convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). This system is robust and accurate in data collection and,
at the same time, presents itself as economically advantageous and
more accurate than some state-of-the-art automatic systems. The
main contributions of this paper are thus the following:

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Accessibility systems and
tools; Social tagging systems; • Information systems → Spatialtemporal systems.

KEYWORDS
Visitors tracking; Deep learning; Machine learning; Object detection;
ACM Reference Format:
Mauro Mezzini, Carla Limongelli, Giuseppe Sansonetti, and Carlo De Medio.
2020. Tracking Museum Visitors through Convolutional Object Detectors. In
Adjunct Proceedings of the 28th ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation
and Personalization (UMAP ’20 Adjunct), July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3386392.3399282
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UMAP ’20 Adjunct, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7950-2/20/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3386392.3399282

352

INTRODUCTION

Session 7: Workshop on Personalized Access
to Cultural Heritage: PATCH'20

UMAP ’20 Adjunct, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy

(1) describe a system that relies on deep learning technologies
and low-cost tools to monitor visitors in a museum scenario;
(2) analyze and discuss its characteristics and compare them
with those of systems proposed in the literature for similar
purposes;
(3) propose developments and enhancements to implement recommender systems able to make the visitor’s experience
even more pleasant.

visitor is not asked to wear anything and a network of light detection and ranging (LIDAR) devices is used to detect visitors [14]. In
this case, collaboration is not necessary for the visitor. However, in
addition to being particularly more expensive than other systems
proposed, in some cases, this system cannot distinguish the individual visitor from the others, with the consequent loss of accuracy
of the data collected. Differently, the method proposed in this work
- in addition to not being invasive - allows for the acquisition of
a huge amount of information that can be processed to provide a
personalized interaction with each visitor.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the
State of the Art by describing some approaches proposed to improve the visitor’s experience. Section 3 describes the advanced
approach and its scientific basis. In Section 4, we illustrate the experimental settings and discuss the preliminary results obtained.
Finally, Section 5 reports our conclusions and some possible future
developments to enhance the current system prototype.

2

3

PROPOSED METHOD

In this paper, we propose a tracking method based on deep learning tools for object detection and recognition. Recent advances in
the field of image classification and object recognition make these
tools very effective and efficient to recognize predefined objects.
In particular, CNN models [6, 8] easily attain accuracy values near
to 100% on the training set. Thanks to this, it is possible to train
such models to recognize an arbitrary object with a confidence
that is near to the certainty. Based on the above observations, we
developed the following idea for tracking museum visitors. A CNN
model is trained for recognizing two specific objects: a badge, like
that used in conferences (see Fig. 1), and visitors’ faces (see Fig. 2).
At the beginning, the visitor of a museum is invited to wear the

RELATED WORK

Over the past twenty years, many systems have been developed
that focus on user modeling and adaptive techniques to support
visitors and increase their motivations and interests in CH tours.
The relevance of personalization in cultural visits has been studied
in several works (see, for instance, [9, 18]). In [13], the authors surveyed museum visitors to discover the different users’ features and
the related useful adaptive functions that could be implemented to
improve their visiting experience. This study revealed that, beyond
the interests and knowledge of the individual visitor, it is important to classify users into stereotypes including visitors on their
first visit, frequent visitors, families, schools, and adults, as well
as interaction preferences with the system (automatic/interactive).
Based on these characteristics, the main interests of stereotypes
have been identified. For example, a frequent visitor may expect a
broad and detailed description of the works, a family with children
may prefer curiosities about the works, or a visitor on her first
experience may want to get a general idea behind artworks, therefore with a broad spectrum, but not very detailed. All this involves
classifying the users’ preferences (and, therefore, the actions to
be implemented) based on their category of belonging. However,
these associations are arbitrary, but they can be taken as starting
points that are gradually adapted to the visitors’ behavior. Many
tools have been proposed to analyze the visitor’s behavior and interact with her, from the first Personal Digital Assistant [19] to the
use of the mobile eye-tracker which involves wearing glasses with
both a camera and viewer and eye detection [12]. In the research
literature, there exist several works for tracing visitors and their
visits to a museum. In some of them, the visitor is proposed to
wear or otherwise carry with her a more or less intelligent electronic device. This device is capable of emitting signals (Bluetooth
or radio-frequency identification (RFID)) which are then picked up
by receiving control units suitably positioned inside the museum.
The latter can, therefore, detect and record the spatial position of
the apparatus and consequently of the visitor who wears it [7]. In
this case, the visitors must always lend themself to collaborate and
bring the equipment with them. All these tools are invasive and do
not allow the visitor to have a direct approach to the works, thus
altering the emotional impact of the observer. In other cases, the

Figure 1: The badge used in the experiments.

Figure 2: The objects recognized in a video frame.
badge on which a CNN model is trained. This model, as confirmed
by the experiments described in Section 4, can recognize the badge
very easily and accurately. To this aim, it is required that cameras

353

Session 7: Workshop on Personalized Access
to Cultural Heritage: PATCH'20

UMAP ’20 Adjunct, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy

are installed inside the museum environment. In our case, simple,
inexpensive, and off-the-shelf cameras are sufficient. These cameras
should be strategically placed inside the museum premises in a way
that the badge worn by the active visitor is always visible by at least
one camera. A simple assumption is to install one camera on every
side of every room, at a height that minimizes the possibility that
another visitor put herself in front of the active visitor wearing the
badge thus making it not visible from the camera. Since the cameras
are inexpensive, the use of more cameras concerning the simple
aforementioned assumption should not result in a substantial increase in the installation cost. Once the recorded (or online, if more
computing resources are available) video is acquired by cameras, it
is given in input to the model to detect the visitor’s badge and face
inside each video-frame.
The detection process consists in estimating, for a maximum
prefixed number 𝑅 of rectangles or boxes and inside each videoframe, a measure 0 < 𝑝 ≤ 1 and a class 𝑐 of the box. The value 𝑝 is
called score and is associated with the class 𝑐. In our case, the number
of possible values of 𝑐 is two because we trained the model in order
to recognize only two possible classes: badge and face. The output of
the detection process consists in a set of 𝑅 triples (𝑐𝑖 , 𝑝𝑖 , b𝑖 ) where
𝑐𝑖 is the class, 𝑝𝑖 its score, and b𝑖 a 4-dimensional vector containing
the coordinates of the upper left and the lower right vertices of
the box where the object 𝑐𝑖 is detected, with 0 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑅. Hereafter,
the vector b𝑖 will be referred to as the bounding box of the object
of class 𝑐𝑖 and we will denote the coordinates of the upper left
and lower right corners of the bounding box by (b𝑖 (𝑦1 ), b𝑖 (𝑥 1 ))
and (b𝑖 (𝑦2 ), (b𝑖 (𝑥 2 )), respectively. If the value of 𝑝 for a class 𝑐
is higher than a prefixed threshold 𝜎 (in our experimental tests,
we empirically set 𝜎 = 0.6), we assume that the object of class 𝑐 is
detected inside the video-frame. The value of 𝜎 is a hyper-parameter
of the system. For high values of the 𝜎 parameter, we can have a
high number of false negatives, while, for low values, we can have
a high number of false positives.
We compute the spatial position of the visitor from the detected
bounding boxes as follows. First of all, we have to calibrate the
camera and compute the angular amplitude 𝛼 of each pixel of the
camera. This can be done by placing an object of unit length at a
unit distance from the camera (see Fig. 3(a)). If we define a constant
𝛾 = 2 arctan (0.5), then we have 𝛼 = 𝛾/𝑚 where 𝑚 is the number of
pixels of the unit length object inside the video-frame (see Fig. 3(b)).
Knowing the angular amplitude of the pixel and the real dimensions

compute the distance ℓ of the badge from the camera, which can
be done as follows (see Fig. 4(a)):
𝐻
(1)
ℓ=
 𝛼𝑚 𝑦 
2 tan
2
where 𝑚 𝑦 = |b(𝑦1 ) − b(𝑦2 )| is the number of pixels of the height
of the badge bounding box in the video-frame (see Fig. 4(b)).

Figure 4: Computing the badge distance from the camera.
In Equation 1, we can also replace the term 𝑚 𝑦 with the term
𝑚𝑥 = |b(𝑥 1 ) −b(𝑥 2 )|. As above, we can compute the angle 𝛽 that the
badge forms with the vertical centerline of the video-frame. Thus,
the pair (ℓ, 𝛽) corresponds to the polar coordinates of the badge
in the camera reference. The visitor position inside the museum
can be obtained adding the values of the camera coordinates in
the museum reference. Knowing the video frame rate, we can also
determine the exact time and duration of the museum visit.

4 EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
Experimental settings
In our experimental tests, we used the deep learning application
program interface (API) for object detection and recognition proposed in [5]. We manually built a dataset of 600 images with size
640x480 pixels: we used 500 images for training and 100 images for
testing. The images of the dataset were similar to the one reported
in Figure 2. In other terms, every image of the dataset contained at
most two people and the badge shown in Figure 1. The preparation
of the training and testing datasets required to label each image
and to draw a bounding box around each object to be recognized.
Although the badge was sufficient to exactly detect the visitor, we
chose to include also her face because we may use it to evaluate
her emotions during the visit. This can be done, for example, by
using the system described in [11]. The software detection API
offers several pre-trained models with different performance. They
are all trained using 90 different classes. We experimented with
the following detectors: Faster R-CNN [15] and Single Shot MultiBox Detector [10]. For the first one, we tried two core networks:
Inception-v2 [20] and ResNet-101 [4]. We managed to have a model
capable of correctly recognizing the two classes through only Faster
R-CNN (with ResNet101 backbone). The reason for this was likely
due to the small size of the training set. Using an Invidia QUADRO
P2000 GPU, the frame rate required to process a video was about
4 frames per second. Both objects were correctly recognized with
an accuracy value of near 0.98. While we expected a high accuracy
value in detecting the badge since it appeared in the images of the

Figure 3: Computing the angular amplitude of a pixel.
of the badge (i.e., 𝐿=10.4cm and 𝐻 =14.0cm), it is straightforward to

354

Session 7: Workshop on Personalized Access
to Cultural Heritage: PATCH'20

UMAP ’20 Adjunct, July 14–17, 2020, Genoa, Italy

REFERENCES

training set, we also found significant results in detecting faces.
This occurred although the training set consisted of only two different faces. We believe that this ability to generalize was since we
employed a pre-trained model. In support of this, we tried to train
the model from scratch but in that case, the system was unable to
correctly classify the two objects, probably due to the small number
of images in the training set. Several recorded videos are available
on the web page1 .

[1] Liliana Ardissono, Tsvi Kuflik, and Daniela Petrelli. 2012. Personalization in
Cultural Heritage: The Road Travelled and the One Ahead. User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction 22 (05 2012), 73–99.
[2] Hendrik Drachsler, Katrien Verbert, Olga C. Santos, and Nikos Manouselis. 2015.
Panorama of Recommender Systems to Support Learning. In Recommender
Systems Handbook. 421–451.
[3] Alessandro Fogli and Giuseppe Sansonetti. 2019. Exploiting Semantics for
Context-Aware Itinerary Recommendation. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing
23, 2 (April 2019), 215–231.
[4] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. 2016. Deep Residual Learning for Image
Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
770–778.
[5] J. Huang, V. Rathod, C. Sun, M. Zhu, A. Korattikara, A. Fathi, I. Fischer, Z. Wojna,
Y. Song, S. Guadarrama, and K. Murphy. 2017. Speed/Accuracy Trade-Offs for
Modern Convolutional Object Detectors. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3296–3297.
[6] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. 2012. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 1
(NIPS’12). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, 1097–1105.
[7] Joel Lanir, Tsvi Kuflik, Julia Sheidin, Nisan Yavin, Kate Leiderman, and Michael
Segal. 2017. Visualizing Museum Visitors’ Behavior: Where Do They Go and
What Do They Do There? Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 21, 2 (April 2017), 313–326.
[8] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep Learning. Nature
521, 7553 (2015), 436–444.
[9] Carla Limongelli, Filippo Sciarrone, Marco Temperini, and Giulia Vaste. 2012. The
use of e-learning methodologies and technologies for generating personalised
tours in cultural heritage environments. Int. J. of Tourism Anthropology 2 (01
2012), 53–70.
[10] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott E. Reed,
Cheng-Yang Fu, and Alexander C. Berg. 2016. SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector.
In Computer Vision - ECCV 2016 - 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part I (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science), Vol. 9905. Springer, 21–37.
[11] Daniel McDuff, Abdelrahman Mahmoud, Mohammad Mavadati, May Amr, Jay
Turcot, and Rana el Kaliouby. 2016. AFFDEX SDK: A Cross-Platform RealTime Multi-Face Expression Recognition Toolkit. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA
’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3723–3726.
[12] Moayad Mokatren, Tsvi Kuflik, and Ilan Shimshoni. 2016. Listen to What You
Look at: Combining an Audio Guide with a Mobile Eye Tracker on the Go. In
Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cultural
Heritage co-located with the 15th International Conference of the Italian Association
for Artificial Intelligence (AI*IA 2016), Genoa, Italy, November 28, 2016. 2–9.
[13] Daniela Petrelli and Elena Not. 2005. User-centred design of flexible hypermedia
for a mobile guide: reflections on the hyperaudio experience. User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction 15, 3-4 (2005), 303.
[14] M. G. Rashed, R. Suzuki, T. Yonezawa, A. Lam, Y. Kobayashi, and Y. Kuno. 2016.
Tracking Visitors in a Real Museum for Behavioral Analysis. In 2016 Joint 8th
International Conference on Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems (SCIS) and
17th International Symposium on Advanced Intelligent Systems (ISIS). 80–85.
[15] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. 2015. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee,
M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates, Inc., 91–99.
[16] Giuseppe Sansonetti. 2019. Point of Interest Recommendation Based on Social
and Linked Open Data. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 23, 2 (April 2019),
199–214.
[17] Giuseppe Sansonetti, Fabio Gasparetti, and Alessandro Micarelli. 2019. CrossDomain Recommendation for Enhancing Cultural Heritage Experience. In Adjunct Publication of the 27th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP’19 Adjunct). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 413–415.
[18] Giuseppe Sansonetti, Fabio Gasparetti, Alessandro Micarelli, Federica Cena, and
Cristina Gena. 2019. Enhancing Cultural Recommendations through Social and
Linked Open Data. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 29, 1 (March
2019), 121–159.
[19] Oliviero Stock, Massimo Zancanaro, Paolo Busetta, Charles Callaway, Antonio
Krüger, Michael Kruppa, Tsvi Kuflik, Elena Not, and Cesare Rocchi. 2007. Adaptive, intelligent presentation of information for the museum visitor in PEACH.
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 17, 3 (July 2007), 257–304.
[20] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna. 2016. Rethinking the
Inception Architecture for Computer Vision. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2818–2826.

Discussion
The first noteworthy aspect of the proposed system is that the cost
of badges, like the one shown in Figure 1, is so low that they are
often given for free to participants of events such as congresses and
conferences. Furthermore, the cameras required for implementing
the system are off-the-shelf or phone cameras. From these observations, we understand that the cost of our entire system for tracking
museum visitors can be extremely low, certainly lower, for example,
than that of the system proposed in [14] where the cost of a single
LIDAR scanner can be in the order of thousands of dollars. Moreover, based on the authors’ experience, wearing a badge during
a social event requires a minimal collaborative effort on the part
of the visitor. Once the badge is worn, the visitor often tends to
completely forget about it during the event. Using cameras and
detecting faces can also enable us to analyze the visitors’ emotions
and moods. This could provide added value in recommending to
users visits more and more suited to their interests and moods. To
the best of our knowledge, in the literature there exist no systems
for tracking visitors that can also capture their emotions and take
advantage of them in the recommendation process. Another key
aspect of our system is that its accuracy in estimating the visitor’s
position can be pushed on the order of 10−2 meter. So this aspect
also makes our system competitive with those in the State of the
Art.

5

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS

In this paper, we have described a tracking system that relies on
deep learning technologies to monitor visitors and their behavior.
The system leverages inexpensive badges and off-the-shelf cameras,
which makes it economically viable. This aspect, together with the
minimum collaborative effort required to the visitor and the excellent performance in terms of accuracy, make the proposed approach
advantageous compared to several state-of-the-art systems.
The analysis of the visitor’s tracks in a museum can represent
the starting point for implementing recommender systems (RSs).
They could allow museum curators and personnel to adapt the
visits based on visitors and their behavior. Such RSs could also
take the visitors’ emotions into account to further personalize their
suggestions. The next step of our research activities will be to build
a training set including different types of badges and more faces to
make the system more and more robust and accurate. Preliminary
results of tests performed using distinct badges were encouraging,
but further experimental trials are needed to understand the possible limitations of our approach. Finally, we plan to test our system
in a real museum scenario.
1 http://host.uniroma3.it/docenti/mezzini/inclusive_memory.html

(Accessed: May 14,

2020)

355

