Viewing Art Museum Visitors Through the Lens of Identity
Author(s): John H. Falk
Source: Visual Arts Research , 2008, Vol. 34, No. 2, Museum Education (2008), pp. 25-34
Published by: University of Illinois Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20715472
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/20715472?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

University of Illinois Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to Visual Arts Research

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

Viewing Art Museum Visitors Through the Lens of Identity
John H. Falk
Oregon State University
Based upon the findings of hundreds of long-term

interviews with museum visitors, Falk observes

that museum visits generate complex, person
ally rich meanings for people. He hypothesizes
that visitors have a working model of what an art

museum affords and self-select to use the mu
seum based on a limited set of identity-related
self-aspects?traits, roles, attitudes, and group
memberships associated with self-identification.
He further hypothesizes that visitors utilize these
self-aspects both prospectively in justifying their
visit, revealed through self-defined visit motiva
tions, and again retrospectively in order to make

sense of their visit, revealed when reflecting
upon and describing their visit. Although mu
seum visitors could posses an infinite number
of identity-related museum self-aspects, this
does not appear to be the case; in general, the
ways in which people describe their purpose for
visiting museums tend to cluster into five basic
categories. The results of numerous studies in
dicate that a majority of museum visitors can be

categorized as possessing a single dominant
one of these five identity-related motivations.

The meanings made by individuals classified
as falling within different motivational categories

significantly differ, both in the short and long
term. The article describes these five categories
of identity-related visit motivations and provides
initial thoughts about how these ideas might be
used to improve art museum practice.

A: My boyfriend at the time, now he's my

husband.

Q: Whose decision was it to come?
A: We stumbled upon it, we were just
wandering around, we were looking for

the Natural History Museum?and we
still haven't found it?we were going
there [Natural History Museum] and
ended up at the art museum.

Q: So it was okay for you to visit an art

museum?

A: On Saturday it is the Sabbath so God
said take pleasure in my creation on
the Sabbath. So it didn't really matter

whether it was a natural history mu
seum or an art museum.

Q: So your purpose in visiting was spiri

tual?

A: Yes, to cherish God's creation, to take
a part and take notice. But also to find
out more for ourselves, to enrich our
selves in the process.
Q: What did you think was the most mem
orable thing you saw at the museum?

A: The most memorable thing was that it
was interesting. That is why we came
back today.

Q: Any specific exhibition stand out in

memory?

A: The whole thing.

Introduction

Q: What about particular works of art?
A: Yes, there was a beautiful painting that

Q: Do you remember your last visit to an

art museum?

A: Yes, it was about a year ago at least,
to this very museum.

Q: Do you remember if it was a weekday

or a weekend?

A: It was the Sabbath. It was Saturday.

Q: With whom did you go to the muse

um?

was quite abstract but reminded me
of a sunrise. It had amazing shades
of reds, pinks and oranges; all seem
ing to emanate from one source. It re

minded me of the times I've sat and
watched sunrises and thought about

the glory of God and how much I have
to be grateful for each and every day.

Q: Any other painting that stands out in

memory?

VISUAL ARTS RESEARCH ? 2008 by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois 25

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

A: Yes, there were a number of other
beautiful paintings that I really liked,

and then there was a contemporary
art piece that showed embryos and
babies. I remember that one in par
ticular.

Q: Why did that painting stand out in
memory, what about it was so memo

rable?

A: All the embryos and babies.

Q: Did you like that?
A: Well, personally, no. It scared me to

death.

would say that what defines me is that

I have an inquisitive mind and a love
of God. But just by knowing me you
wouldn't say, "Oh that's where she'll
be hanging out."

This is an excerpt from an extended
interview with an individual who, for the
sake of anonymity, we'll call Portia. Portia

is Jamaican American, in her early 30s,
who teaches mathematics at the university
level. This interview is typical of the more

than 100 interviews my colleagues and I

have conducted with individuals about their

Q: Why did it scare you? Did it remind
you of a personal experience?
A: Yes, I don't want to have kids.

Q: You don't?

A: No!
Q: I'm just curious, was that a topic of
conversation with your boyfriend, now

husband, at that time?
A: Yes, he's got his kids. I wanted to marry

a man who was already through kids.
[Later during the interview...]

Q: What were your expectations for the

visit?

long-term recollections of museum-going.
Portia's interview in particular is quite in
triguing as it reveals numerous layers of
complexity about her, her experience at the
museum, and her motivations for visiting.
Even in these brief excerpts, we can see
the complex, personally rich meanings that

museum visits have for people. Certainly
this brief visit to an art museum was deeply
intertwined with Portia's sense of who she

is and what she wants to be. Although it
wouldn't appear that Portia is deeply knowl

edgeable about art, visiting the art muse
um appeared to satisfy several important

A: Mainly we were looking to see what
God has done. We got a lot more than
we expected.

Q: In what ways?
A: You have an idea of the things that hu
mans are capable of creating?but you

come in and see all the little details
and see that we are so complicated

and capable of so much. Yet when you
see someone on the street and think,
"Oh ifs just another human being." But

each person is so chock full of things
and ideas and there are millions of us
chock full of all these different poten
tials. You walk away with a new appre

ciation of people.
[Later during the interview...]

Q: Would anybody be surprised to see
you at an art museum?
A: Not me.
Q: Rate this sentence: "Going to an art
museum is something that defines
who I am."

A: I wouldn't say it defines me, but I

identity-related needs for her, including her
religiously inspired sense of how humans fit

within the universe, her relationship to her
now-husband, and her sense of herself as
a curious, inquisitive person. Although upon
initial questioning Portia intimates that the
motivation for her past art museum visit was
quite random and accidental, we can infer
from this brief interview that perhaps the

exact venue was accidental, but there was
nothing accidental about her desire to visit
a museum. Portia appeared to be motivated
by some fairly deeply held needs. And given
that she and her husband were returning

again to this same museum, we are prob
ably safe in further inferring that her earlier

visit to the art museum had actually been
quite satisfying.
Portia's description of her art museum

visit provides a fascinating lens through

which to better understand the nature of the

museum experience. Time and time again
in these long-term interviews, particularly
ones like Portia's where an effort was made

26 John H. Falk

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

to probe deeply into the visitor's motivations

for the visit and the satisfactions derived,

what leaps out is how deeply personal
museum visits are, and how deeply tied
to each individual's sense of identity. Also
striking is how consistently an individual's
post-visit narrative relates to their entering
narrative. In other words, prior to entering
the art museum Portia would have talked
about how this visit was all about her desire
to honor the Sabbath, to, as she put it, "take

pleasure in [God's] creation on the Sab

Visitor Motivation and Identity
Considerable time and effort has been in
vested in understanding the motivations of

museum visitors. As previously reviewed
by Falk (2006), a variety of investigators
(e.g., Doering & Pekarik, 1996; Ellenbogen,

2003; Falk, 1998; Falk & Dierking, 1992;

Gore, Mahnken, Norstrom, & Walls, 1980;

Graburn, 1977; Hood, 1983; McManus,
1992; Merriman, 1991; Miles, 1986; Mous
souri, 1997; Packer & Ballantyne, 2002;
Pekarik, Doering, & Karns, 1999; Prentice,

bath." A year later, this was still not only a
salient motivation for her, but also the domi

Davies, & Beeho, 1997; Rosenfeld, 1980)

nant framework through which she made

museums, resulting in a range of descriptive
categorizations. More recently, investigators

sense of her experience. Many, but not all
of her memories of the experience revolved
around this frame of reference. Both the
ways in which individuals talk about why
they come to museums and the ways they
talk about what they remember from the ex
perience invariably seem to have a lot to do

with what they were seeking to personally
accomplish through their visit, how these
personal goals related to who they thought
they were, and how the museum itself sup

ported their personal goals and needs. The
insights gained from this and subsequent

research are leading to new ideas about
how to view the museum experience, ideas
that hold the promise of enabling museums
to better customize and personalize their
visitor's experiences. This new construct,
which is just beginning to move from the
theoretical into the practical realm, is based
upon the thought that all visitors' motiva
tions tend to cluster into one of a handful
of predictable categories. These categories
of motivations are expressions of visitor's
desire to use the museum as a vehicle for
satisfying a set of identity-related needs. By

better understanding, identifying, and re
sponding to each visitor's identity-related

needs and motivations, museum profes
sionals should be able to enhance the qual
ity of the visit experience, which will lead to
increased visitor satisfaction and use of the
institution.

have sought to describe why people visit

have begun to document the connections
between visitors' entering motivations and
their exiting meaning making (e.g., Briseno
Garzon, Anderson, & Anderson, 2007; Falk,
Moussouri, & Coulson, 1998; Falk & Storks

dieck, 2005; Leinhartd & Knutson, 2004;
Packer, 2006; Packer & Ballantyne, 2002).
This is not surprising if, as postulated by Do

ering and Pekarik (1996; Pekarik, Doering,
& Karns 1999), one starts with the idea that
visitors are likely to enter a museum with
an entry narrative and these entry narra
tives are likely to be self-reinforcing, direct

ing both learning and behavior, because
visitors' perceptions of satisfaction will be
directly related to experiences that resonate
with their entering narrative. I (2006) took
these ideas one step further and proposed
that, although people have diverse reasons
for choosing to visit museums, these diverse
reasons tend to cluster around a relatively
small number of motivational categories,
categories that appear to be related to visi
tors' desires to use the museum as a setting
for satisfying their identity-related needs.

For more than 100 years the constructs

of self and identity have been used by a

wide range of social science investiga
tors from a variety of disciplines. Perhaps
not surprisingly, then, there is no single
agreed-upon definition of self or identity,

though there are a number of useful re
views of these various perspectives (cf.,

Baumeister, 1999; Bruner & Kalmar, 1998;

Viewing Museum Visitors Through Identity 27

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

McAdams, 1990; Rounds, 2006; Simon,
2004; Woodward, 2002). Highlighting the
complexities of the topic, Bruner and Kal
mar (1998, p. 326) state, "Self is both outer

and inner, public and private, innate and
acquired, the product of evolution and the
offspring of culturally shaped narrative."

Perhaps more pointedly, Simon (2004, p.
3) states that:
even if identity turns out to be an "analyti
cal fiction," it will prove to be a highly use
ful analytical fiction in the search for a bet

sess a strong sense of gender, nationality,
or, like Portia, religion much of our lives are

spent enacting a series of more situated
identities that represent responses to the
needs and realities of the specific moment
and situation (little "i" identities). Thus, any
particular event in our lives can be thought
of as involving some combination of "I" and
"i" identities?sometimes " identities domi
nate, other times "i" identities dominate, and
other times both are at work.

Following on the work of Linville (1985)

and Simon (1997, 1998, 1999, 2004), my

ter understanding of human experiences
and behaviors. If used as a shorthand ex

premise is that, as active meaning seekers,

pression or placeholder for social psycho
logical processes revolving around self

most museum visitors engage in a degree
of self-reflection and self-interpretation

definition or self-interpretation, including
the variable but systematic instantiations

about their visit experience. According to
Simon (2004, p. 45), "through self-interpre
tation, people achieve an understanding of
themselves or, in other words, an identity,
which in turn influences their subsequent
perception and behavior." In Simon's model,
self-interpretation involves a varying num

thereof, the notion of identity will serve the

function of a powerful conceptual tool.

It is just such a conceptual tool that I was
seeking as I tried to better understand the
nature of the museum experience.
The model of identity that I utilize has

antecedents in the work of a number of
other investigators. Like Bronfenbrenner

(1979), Holland, Lachiotee, Skinner, and
Cain (1998), and Simon (2004), I subscribe
to the view that identity is the confluence of

internal and external social forces?cultural

and individual agencies, and, like Bruner

and Kalmar (1998) and Neisser (1988),

I would also acknowledge the important
evolutionary influence on identity of innate
and learned perceptions about the physical
environment. From this perspective, iden

tity emerges as malleable, continually con
structed, and always situated in the realities

of the physical and sociocultural world?
both the immediate social and physical
world an individual may be immersed in
as well as the broader social and physical
world of an individual's family, culture, and
personal history. Each of us maintains nu

ber of "self-aspects"?a cognitive category
or concept that serves to process and orga
nize information and knowledge about ones
self. According to Simon (2004, p. 46), self
aspects can refer to:
generalized psychological characteristics
or traits (e.g., introverted), physical fea
tures (e.g., red hair), roles (e.g., father),
abilities (e.g., bilingual), tastes (e.g., pref
erence for French red wines), attitudes
(e.g., against the death penalty), behav
iours (e.g., I work a lot), and explicit group

or category membership (e.g., member
of the Communist party).

In other words, within a specific situation,
individuals make sense of their actions and

roles by ascribing identity-related qualities

or descriptions to them. The research of
Cantor, Mischel, and Schwarz (1982) and
Schutte, Kenrich, and Sadalla (1985) rein
force this model, they found that individuals

ams, 1990) which are expressed collectively

do indeed construct identity-relevant situ
ational prototypes that served as a working

or individually at different times, depending

model for the person, telling him or her what

of enduring and deep identities (big "I" iden
tities) for example, many individuals pos

to expect and how to behave in situations
of a particular type. I believe this is quite
likely what visitors to museums also do.
Visitors have a working model of what

merous identities (cf. Cooper 1999; McAd

upon need and circumstance. Although
each of us possesses and acts upon a set

28 John H. Falk

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

the museum affords and then ascribe a se
ries of self-aspects to their museum experi
ences framed around these museum affor

dances. Visitor's self-aspects are congruent
with both the situational prototypes of the
context and their own perceived identity

related roles and needs. As described by
Erikson (1968), individuals have no choice

never seen or known anything about before.
That was really wonderful."

These interpretations are invariably
self-referential and provide coherence and
meaning to the experience. Visitors tend to

see their in-museum behavior and post
visit outcomes as consistent with personal
ity traits, attitudes, and/or group affiliations

but to form their identities using as a frame

such as being a curious person or, as in

work "the existing range of alternatives for
identity formation" (Erikson, 1968, p. 190). I
have hypothesized, and my colleagues and
I have found evidence supporting the prop
osition, that visitors then utilize these self

the case of Portia, finding reinforcement for

aspects to both prospectively justify their
visit and then again retrospectively in order
to make sense of their visit (Falk, Heimlich,

& Bronnenkant, 2008; Falk & Storksdieck,
2004; Falk & Storksdieck, in press).
Identity is something all of us intuitively
understand at some level, but it has proven

a notoriously challenging idea to scientifi
cally operationalize. There is currently no
universally agreed-upon definition of or way

the belief that the spirit of God is revealed
through human creativity. Others use the
museum to satisfy personally relevant roles

and values such as being a good parent
or an intrepid cultural tourist. Despite the
commonalities in these self-aspects across
groups of visitors, individual visitors experi

ence these self-aspects as expressions of
their own unique personal identity.

How you see yourself as a museum

visitor depends to a large degree upon
how you conceptualize the museum. In
other words, if you view yourself as a good

father and believe that museums are the

to measure identity. The way my colleagues

kind of places to which good fathers bring
their children, then you might actively seek

identity utilizes visitors' own rationales for
visiting, both prior and subsequent to their
visit, as windows into visitors' identity-relat

an identity. Or, if you think of yourself as
the kind of curious person who goes out

and I have chosen to define and measure

ed needs and desires. For example, many

art museum visitors describe themselves as

curious people, generally interested in art.
They see art museums as great places for
exercising that curiosity and interest. When
one particular individual was asked about

art museums she responded, "Art muse
ums are great places to visit because they
put together exhibitions designed to culti
vate people's interests and understandings
of art." When asked why she was visiting the

art museum today she answered, "I came
to see what's new here. I haven't been in a

out such a place in order to "enact" such

of your way to discover unusual and in
teresting facts about human expression,
then you might actively seek out an art or
history museum during your leisure time. I
believe that this is what a large percentage
of visitors to museums actually do, not just
with regards to parenting and religious be
havior, but as a means for enacting a wide
range of identity-related meanings.

As museums have become increasingly
popular leisure venues, more and more
people have developed working models of
what museums are like and how and why
they would use them?in other words, what

while and I was hoping to see some really
new and interesting art." Several months

the museum experience affords. These
museum "affordances" are then matched

later when we recontacted this person, she
reflected back on her visit and said, "I had a

up with the public's identity-related needs
and desires. Together, these create a very
strong, positive feedback loop. The loop be
gins with the public seeking leisure expe
riences that meet specific identity-related

superb time at the art museum, I just wan

dered around and saw all of the fabulous
art; there were some really striking works.
I even discovered a few works that I had

needs, such as personal fulfillment, par

Viewing Museum Visitors Through Identity 29

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

enting, or novelty seeking. As museums
are generally perceived as places capable
of meeting some (though not all) identity
related needs, the public prospectively jus
tifies reasons for making a museum visit.
Over time, visitors reflect upon their muse
um visit and determine whether the experi
ence was a good way to fulfill their needs,
and, if it was, they tell others about the visit.

Finally, they and others will then seek out
this or other museums in the future for the
same reasons.

Over the course of several studies, in a

motivated. Their visit is focused on
primarily enabling the experience and
learning of others in their accompa
nying social group.

"[I came] to spend time with [my]
friends. This is one of things we do. Ac
tually I'm not really that big an art per

son, but several of my friends are so I
come along with them. I must confess,
I probably enjoy the time afterwards, in
the coffee shop more than [the time in]
the galleries. Is that a terrible thing to

variety of museum settings, my colleagues

say?"

and I have found evidence to support the

Professional/Hobbyists: Visitors who

existence of these identity-related feedback
loops (Falk, Heimlich, & Bronnenkant, 2008;

Falk & Storksdieck, 2004; Falk & Storks

dieck, in press; Stein, 2007; Storksdieck &
Stein, 2007). The ways in which individuals

described their museum experiences ap
pear to reflect visitor's situationally-specific,

identity-related self-aspects. Although, in

theory, museum visitors could posses an
infinite number of identity-related "self-as
pects," this does not appear to be the case.

Both the reasons people give for visiting
museums and their post-visit descriptions
of the experience tended to cluster around
just a few basic categories, which in turn ap
peared to reflect how the public perceives

what a museum visit affords. Based upon
these findings and the work of Moussouri
(1997) and Packer and Ballantyne (2002), I
have proposed clustering all the various mo
tivations visitors ascribe to visiting museums
into just five distinct, identity-related catego

ries. Descriptions of the five categories and
some typical quotes from visitors follow:

Explorers: Visitors who are curiosity
driven with a generic interest in the
content of the museum. They expect
to find something that will grab their
attention and fuel their learning.

Tve always liked art and like to see

feel a close tie between the museum

content and their professional or hob

byist passions. Their visits are typi
cally motivated by a desire to satisfy
a specific content-related objective.
"I'm starting to collect Asian ceramics,

so I have a lot of interest in the col
lection here. Not only the ceramics on
display, but particularly the information

on the different shapes and glazes
characteristic of the different periods.
I'm hoping to pick up some useful in
formation."

Experience Seekers: Visitors who are
motivated to visit because they per
ceive the museum as an important
destination. Their satisfaction primarily
derives from the mere fact of having
"been there and done that."
"We were visiting from out of town and

had heard they have a really spectac
ular art museum here."

Spiritual Pilgrims: Visitors who are
primarily seeking to have a contem
plative, spiritual and/or restorative ex

perience. They see the museum as a
refuge from the work-a-day world or as
a confirmation of their religious beliefs.

the new exhibitions when they come

"/ like art museums. They are so very

things, but I really enjoy it. It exposes

quiet and relaxing, so different than the
noise and clutter of the rest of the city."

to town. It's not that I need to see these

me to new ideas and images."

As predicted, and evidenced in these

Facilitators: Visitors who are socially quotes and the interviews with Portia fea

30 John H. Falk

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

tured at the start of this article, museum
visitors use museums to satisfy identity
related needs?both deeply held identi
ties such as their religious views and their

sense of themselves as "art people" as
well as more ephemeral identities such as
the need to visit some place emblematic
of a city they are visiting or to escape the
hum-drum of the world. Perhaps most im
portant, though, is that my research has

produced strong evidence that categoriz
ing visitors as a function of their perceived

identity-related visit motivations can be
used as a conceptual tool for capturing
important insights into how visitors make

once they leave. In other words, being able
to segment visitors this way gives museum
practitioners key insights into the needs and
interests of their visitors; not a one-size
fits-all perspective, but information about
key groupings of visitors. For example, our

research has revealed that Explorers are
focused on what they see and find interest
ing, and act out this me-centered agenda
regardless of whether they are part of a
social group or not. Facilitators are focused
on what their significant others see and find
interesting, and they act out this agenda by,

for example, allowing their significant oth
ers to direct the visit and worrying primarily

sense of their museum experience?both

about whether the other person is seeing

prior to arriving, during the experience and

what they find interesting rather than focus

over time as they reflect back upon the

ing on their own interests. Experience Seek
ers are prone to reflect upon the gestalt of
the day, particularly how enjoyable the visit
is. Professional/Hobbyists tend to enter with
very specific, content-oriented interests and
use the museum as a vehicle for facilitating
those interests (e.g., a personal collection
or taking photographs). Finally, Spiritual Pil

visit. In the most detailed study to date, the

majority of visitors could not only be cat

egorized as falling into one of these five
categories, but individuals within a cat
egory behaved and learned in ways that

were different from individuals in other cat

egories. Specifically, individuals in some of
the categories showed significant changes
in their understanding and affect, while
individuals in other categories did not; for

some categories of visitor the museum
experience was quite successful, while
for others it was only marginally so. Thus,
unlike traditional segmentation strategies

based upon demographic categories like
age, race/ethnicity, gender, or even educa
tion, separating visitors according to their
entering identity-related motivations result
ed in descriptive data predictive of visitors'

museum experience.

Implications for Practice
I believe that this line of research has im
portant implications for practice. Not only is

research revealing that the majority of visi
tors to museums seem to arrive with one
of five general motivations for visiting, it ap
pears that these identity-related motivations

directly relate to key outcomes in the mu
seum setting, such as how visitors behave
and interact with the setting and importantly,

how they make meaning of the experience

grims, like Experience Seekers, are more
focused on the gestalt of the day. But un
like Experience Seekers, Spiritual Pilgrims
are not so much interested in having fun,

as they are interested in having a peace
ful or inspiring experience. By focusing on
these needs/interests, museum profession
als could begin to customize and personal
ize the visitor experience and satisfy more
people more of the time.
Another important conclusion from this
line of research has been that the "one size

fits all" experiences provided visitors by
most museums (e.g., exhibits, programs,
tours) do not work equally well for all of
these groups. The content was just right
for some, and totally missed the mark for
others. By learning more about the specific
needs of each of these groups at any spe
cific institution, it should become possible
to better serve the needs of each particular
group of visitors. It also should be possible
to begin to create more satisfied visitors.
The closer the relationship between a visi
tor's perception of his/her actual museum
experience and his/her perceived identity
Viewing Museum Visitors Through Identity 31

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

related needs, the more likely that visitors
will perceive that their visit was good and
the more likely they will be to return to the

museum again and encourage others to
do so as well.
For example, Explorers are a particular
ly common group of art museum visitors.

Explorers are individuals with a natural

motivation. One way to do so might be to
explicitly "thank" these visitors for bringing

their children to the museum, such as by
saying, "You were a really good parent to
day. It looks as if your children had a really
great time, and I know they learned a lot,
too." And if you were able to communicate
with visitors before the visit, you could help

ally they are not experts. These visitors

Spiritual Pilgrims know where the least
crowded, most peaceful places in the mu

enjoy "behind the scenes" tours and other
chances to feel that they are seeing things
that others are not. Provide Explorers with
a unique museum experience and you will
fulfill their need to feel special and encour

seum are to visit. Or if yours is a particularly
crowded institution, you could invite Spiritu
al Pilgrims to visit at those times when they
could find the rejuvenation they seek. A sur
prisingly high percentage of members are

affinity for the subject matter but gener

age them to come back for more. Profes
sional/Hobbyists, on the other hand, tend

to be quite knowledgeable and expect the
museum to resolve questions others can
not answer. Not surprisingly, these are the
folks who will sign up for special lectures or

courses. Figure out how to reach them?
perhaps by advertising in hobby magazines

or on hobby/professional websites?and
get information about upcoming learning
opportunities into their hands. And perhaps
most importantly, recognize these individu
als when they come into your institution;

likely to be Spiritual Pilgrims; knowing this
provides useful insights into how to specifi
cally please these important patrons.
In short, I believe that customizing mu
seum offerings to suit the distinct needs of
different identity groups will not only better

satisfy regular visitors' needs but provide
a vehicle for enticing occasional visitors to
come more frequently. I also believe that this

approach opens the door to new and cre
ative ways to attract audiences who do not
visit art museums at all. This is because I do
not see the five basic categories of identity
related needs as unique to museum-goers.

these folks want to be acknowledged as
possessing expertise and passion and do

What separates those who go to art muse

not want to be treated as just another one
of the "great unwashed." Experience Seek

perceive art museums as places that sat

ers simply want to have a good time and
see the best of what the museum has to
offer. These are the visitors who will gravi
tate to a tour of collection highlights; they'll
also be the first to be turned off by poor

guest services, such as unfriendly ticket
sellers, overly officious guards or unclean
bathrooms. If your museum attracts a lot
of out-of-town visitors, attending to these
"guest service" issues will pay dividends in
positive word-of-mouth from one Experi

ence Seeker to another.

Many art museums are working hard to
attract more family groups to their institu

tions. Many of the adults in such groups
are likely to be Facilitators, primarily visit

ing in order to be good parents. Under
these circumstances it would make great
sense to acknowledge and reinforce that

ums from those who do not is whether they

isfy these basic needs. In other words, if we
could figure out how to help more people
see art museums as places that fulfill their

needs?and then deliver on this promise?
more people would visit.

Conclusion
A large number of visitors arrive at art muse

ums with preconceived expectations. They

use the museum to satisfy those expecta
tions and then remember the visit for that

reason. Therefore, categorizing visitors as a
function of the five identity-related motiva
tions yields some measure of predictability
about what those visitors' experiences will
be like. Each visitor's experience is of course
unique, but each is likely to be framed within
the socially/culturally defined boundaries of

32 John H. Falk

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

how an art museum visit affords explora
tion, facilitation, experience seeking, profes
sional and hobby support, and spirituality.
Other types of experiences no doubt occur,
but most visitors appear to seek them out or
enact them with relative infrequency.

The lens of identity-related museum
motivations thus provides a unique window
through which we can view the nature of

the museum experience and potentially
can improve it. Although much of what I've
discussed here remains a theory, there now
appears to be sufficient evidence to justify
efforts to use these ideas for improved prac
tice. The hope is that this approach will lead
to dramatically better ways to enhance the
experience of current art museum visitors,
improve the likelihood that occasional art

museum visitors will become regular visi
tors, and provide new and improved ways
to attract groups of individuals who histori

cally have not thought of art museums as
places that meet their needs.

the entrance narrative. Journal of Museum

Education 21(3): 20-25.
Ellenbogen, . M. (2003). From dioramas to the
dinner table: An ethnographic case study of
the role of science museums in family life.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Vanderbilt
University.
Erikson, E.H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis.
New York: Norton.
Falk, J. H. (1998). Visitors: Who does, who doesn't,

and why. Museum News 77(2): 38-43.
Falk, J. H..(2006). The impact of visit motivation
on learning: Using identity as a construct to
understand the visitor experience. Curator,

49(2), 151-166.
Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L.D. (1992). The Museum

Experience. Washington, DC: Whalesback

Books.

Falk, J. H., Heimlich, J., & Bronnenkant, . (2008).
Using identity-related visit motivations as a tool

for understanding adult zoo and aquarium visi

tor's meaning making. Curator, 51(1), 55-80.

Falk, J. H., Moussouri, T, & Coulson, D. (1998).

The effect of visitors' agendas on museum
learning. Curator: The Museum Journal, 41 (2):

106-120.

Falk, J. H., & Storksdieck, M. (2004). Under

References
Baumeister, R. R (1999). The nature and struc
ture of the self: An overview. In R. F. Baumeis

ter (Ed.) The self in social psychology (pp.
1-20). London: Psychology Press.
Briseno-Garzon, A., Anderson, D. & Anderson,
A. (2007). Entry and emergent agendas of

standing the Long-term Impacts of a Science
Center Visit. Final Report to the National Sci

ence Foundation, Grant #0125545. Annapo
lis, MD: Institute for Learning Innovation.

and metanarrative in the construction of self.

Falk, J. H., & Storksdieck, M. (2005). Using the
Contextual Model of Learning to understand
visitor learning from a science center exhibi
tion. Science Education, 89: 744-778.
Falk, J. ., & Storksdieck, M. (in press). Science
learning in a leisure setting. Journal of Re
search in Science Teaching.
Gore, L., Mahnken, M., Norstrom, J., & Walls,
D. (1980). A profile of the visitors: The Dal
las Museum of Natural History. Unpublished

In M. Ferrari and R.J. Sternberg (Eds.) Self
Awareness: Its nature and development (pp.

Graburn, N. H. (1977). The museum and the

adults visiting an aquarium in family groups.
Visitor Studies, 10(1), 73-89.

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of hu
man development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bruner, J., & Kalmar, D. A. (1998). Narrative

308-331). New York: The Guildford Press.

Cantor, N., Mischel, W., & Schwarz, J, (1982).
A prototype analysis of psychological situa
tions. Cognitive Psychology 14, 45-77.
Cooper, C. R. (1999). Multiples selves, multiple
worlds: Cultural perspectives on individuality

and connectedness in adolescence develop
ment. In A. Masten, (Ed.), Minnesota Sympo
sium on Child Psychology: Cultural Process
es in Development (pp. 25-57). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Doering, Z. D., & Pekarik, A. (1996). Questioning

manuscript. University of Dallas, Irving, TX.

visitor experience. In: The Visitor and the Mu

seum, 5-32. Prepared for the 72nd Annual
Conference of the American Association of
Museums, Seattle, WA.
Holland, D., W. Lachicotte, Jr., D. Skinner, &
C. Cain (1998). Identity and Agency in Cul
tural Worlds. Cambridge: Harvard University

Press.

Hood, M. (1983). Staying away: Why people
choose not to visit museums. Museum News,

61(4): 50-57.
Leinhartd, G., & Knutson, K. (2004). Listening in

Viewing Museum Visitors Through Identity 33

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

on museum conversations. Lanham, MD: Al
taMira Press.
Linville, RW. (1985). Self-complexity and affec
tive extremity: don't put all your eggs in one
cognitive basket. Social Cognition, 3, 94-120.

McAdams, D. (1990). The Person: An introduc
tion to personality psychology. Orlando, FL:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

McManus, P. (1992). Topics in museums and sci

ence education. Studies in Science Educa
tion, 20:157-182.

Merriman, N. (1991). Beyond the Glass Case.
Leicester, UK: Leicester University Press.

Miles, R. S. (1986). Museum audiences. The In
ternational Journal of Museum Management
and Curatorship, 5:73-80.
Moussouri, T. (1997). Family agendas and family
learning in hands-on museums. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Leicester,

Leicester, England.
Neisser, U. (1988). Five kinds of self knowledge.

Philosophical Psychology, 1, 35-59.
Packer, J. (2006). Learning for fun: The unique
contribution of educational leisure experienc
es. Curator, 49, 3:329-344.
Packer, J., & Ballantyne, R. 2002. Motivational
factors and the visitor experience: A compari
son of three sites. Curator, 45:183-198.

Pekarik, A. J., Doering, Z. D, & Karns, D.A.
(1999). Exploring satisfying experiences in
museums. Curator, 42:152-173.
Prentice, R., Davies, A., & Beeho, A. (1997).
Seeking generic motivations for visiting and
not visiting museums and like cultural attrac

tions. Museum Management and Curator
ship, 6: 45-70.

Rosenfeld, S. (1980). Informal education in
zoos: Naturalistic studies of family groups.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University
of California, Berkeley.
Rounds, J. (2006). Doing identity work in muse

ums. Curator, 49(2), 133-150.

Schutte, . S., Kenrick, D. T., & Sadalla, E. .

(1985). The search for predictable settings:
Situational prototypes, constraint, and be
havioral variation. Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology, 51, 459-462.
Simon, B. (1997). Self and group in modern so
ciety: Ten theses on the individual self and
collective self. In R. Spears, P. J. Oakes, N.
Ellemera, & S. A. Hasiam (Eds.), The social
psychology of stereotyping and group life (pp.

318-335). Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.
Simon, B. (1998). Individuals, groups, and social

change: On the relationship between indi
vidual and collective self-interpretations and
collective action. In C. Sedikides, J. Schopler,

& C. Insko (Eds.) Intergroup cognition and
intergroup behavior (pp. 257-282). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Simon, B. (1999). A place in the world: Self and

social categorization. In T. R. Tyler, R. M.
Kramer, & O. R John (Eds.). The psychology
of the social self (pp. 47-49). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Simon, B. (2004). Identity in modern society: A
social psychological perspective. Oxford, UK:

Blackwell.

Stein, J. (2007). Adapting the visitor identity-re
lated motivations scale for living history sites.

Paper presented at the Visitor Studies Asso
ciation Annual Meeting, Toronto, CA, July 19.

Storksdieck, M., & Stein, J. (2007). Using the
visitor identity-related motivations scale to
improve visitor experiences at the US Bo
tanic Garden. Paper presented at the Visitor
Studies Association Annual Meeting, Toronto,
CA, July 19.

Woodward, (2002). Understanding identity.
London: Arnold.

Correspondence concerning this article
should be addressed to John H. Falk, Or
egon State University, falkj@science.or
egonstate.edu.

34 John H. Falk

This content downloaded from
147.236.157.58 on Wed, 08 Dec 2021 07:22:28 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

