Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326
DOI 10.1007/s00779-016-0994-9

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Visualizing museum visitors’ behavior: Where do they go
and what do they do there?
Joel Lanir1 • Tsvi Kuflik1 • Julia Sheidin1 • Nisan Yavin1 • Kate Leiderman1
Michael Segal1

•

Received: 14 July 2016 / Accepted: 30 October 2016 / Published online: 19 November 2016
 Springer-Verlag London 2016

Abstract Museum curators and personnel are interested
in understanding what is happening at their museum: what
exhibitions and exhibits do visitors attend to, what exhibits visitors spend most time at, what hours of the day are
most busy at certain areas in the museum and more. We
use automatic tracking of visitors’ position, movements
and interaction at the museum to log visitor information.
Using this information, we provide an interface that
visualizes individual and small group movement patterns,
presentations watched, and aggregated information of
overall visitor engagement at the museum. We utilized a
user centered design approach in which we gathered
requirements, iteratively designed and implemented a
working prototype and evaluated it with the help of
domain experts (museum curators and other museum
personnel). We describe our efforts and provide insights
from the design and evaluation of our system, and outline
how it might be generalized for other indoor domains such
as supermarkets or shopping malls.

& Joel Lanir
ylanir@is.haifa.ac.il
Tsvi Kuflik
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il
Julia Sheidin
jsheidin@is.haifa.ac.il
Nisan Yavin
nisan.yavin@gmail.com
Kate Leiderman
kateleiderman@gmail.com
Michael Segal
msegal14@campus.haifa.ac.il
1

University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel

Keywords Museum behavior  Museum mobile guide 
Visualization  User-centered design

1 Introduction
It is imperative for museum curators and personnel to
understand and be able to analyze the activity and behavior
of visitors at their museum. The behavior of visitors can
provide personnel with feedback on what is happening at
the museum—which exhibits are successful, where do
people go, and in general, how people interact with the
content and exhibit that they have designed. This can
provide them with means to evaluate their work, assess
how the placement and layout of the objects in the museum
affect the way visitors interact, and enable planning and
improving of current practices.
In order to understand visitors’ behavior, museums
today rely either on self-reported questionnaires that visitors fill out at the end of their visit or on manual tracking
and counting of individual visitors using unobtrusive
observations. While questionnaires are useful for providing
demographic and motivational information (such as frequency of museum visits and reason for arriving at the
museum), tracking of visitors can provide objective information about the way visitors interact with the museum
space and content, providing valuable information about
exhibition placements and design. The visitor’s time and
attention span are scarce resources, and they are one of the
parameters by which a museum artifact and museum
exhibitions need to be assessed [1]. Variables that are
measured to understand visitor interaction include total
time spent at an exhibit, number of stops, proportion of
visitors who stop at a specific exhibit and more [2, 3].
However, it is difficult for museums to attain accurate

123

314

information about these measures. Manual tracking and
coding of behavior can be laborious and somewhat
dependent on the coder, and questionnaires are subjective
by nature and cannot provide accurate behavioral data.
With the advent of technology, automatic systems exist
that can track and record visitors’ movements, interaction
and paths during their visit. Intelligent cultural spaces
include technological platforms containing sensors that
detect user’s positions and interactions. These spaces aim
at providing novel applications and services to the visitors
as well as various diagnostic and analytical services that
are based on the large data collected, turning the collected
data into information and then into knowledge [4, 5]. One
such possible service is providing knowledge on museum
visitor behavior. There is an opportunity to provide
museum personnel with detailed and accurate information
that relies on data of hundreds and thousands of visitors
rather than on a few observations, or general intuition. This
information could then be presented to the museum curators and personnel for assessment and for getting insights
about visitor behavior at their museum.
In this work, we present a novel framework for collecting and analyzing information about museum visitors’
behavior. We utilized a user-centered design (UCD) process, in which we first conducted several interviews with
museum curators and personnel in order to understand the
requirements of a system that would help them analyze
visitor behavior. Using a proximity-based indoor positioning system employed at a medium-sized museum, we
collected detailed data of 423 actual visitors, including
their movements, time spent at various exhibits and more.
Using these data, we designed and implemented a prototype system that provides various visualizations of different aspects of visitors’ behavior at the museum. The system
is targeted toward museum personnel and is intended to
provide them with a tool that would enable gaining insights
and understanding of various behavioral patterns. We
evaluated the system by interviewing and handing over
questionnaires to museum curators and other museum
personnel from five different museums. Initial feedback
from the evaluation is very supportive, suggesting that such
a system can be a valuable tool for evaluation of museum
exhibit design.
The contribution of this work is twofold. First, we
provide user-elicited requirements based on interviews
with museum personnel for a museum behavior analysis
system. We show that such a system is needed, and we
refine and validate these requirements in the evaluation of
our system. Second, we provide an end-to-end framework
to design and implement such a system. The framework
can enable museum teams to understand the challenges,
needs and possible solutions in building such a system in
their museum. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2

123

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

describes related work on current behavior measures at the
museum, other human movement visualizations and works
done on automatically analyzing visitor behaviors. Section 3 describes the requirements of the system. Section 4
then describes the system itself, including the infrastructure
(sensors and data) and the user interface modules. In
Sect. 5, we describe the evaluation of the system followed
by a final discussion and our conclusions are given in
Sect. 6.

2 Related Work
We first describe the measures and current ways museum
personnel use to understand visitor behaviors. Then, we
detail research done in the area of indoor movement
analysis and movement visualization.
2.1 Museum visitor behavior measures
Studying museum visitors has been a rapidly evolving
topic within the museum research community [6]. In
today’s economical world, many museums are becoming
more consumer oriented, focusing more and more on the
visitors’ experience and needs, as means to bringing more
visitors to the museum, and expanding the museum activity. There is a shift from treating visitors as an undifferentiated mass to accepting them as individual and active
interpreters. This requires museums to do policy-related
work and perform visitor studies that aim to understand and
explain what visitors experience and do, so museums
would be able to better manage and improve the utilization
of their resources. Understanding visitor’s motivations,
experience and behavior is important in order to help
museum practitioners improve their exhibits, provide better
interpretations, and better understand the way the audience
is experiencing the exhibits and content provided to them
[1, 6].
Studies of visitors range from specific evaluations to
various studies done at the museums, focusing on learning
about attitudes, opinions, behavior and overall experience
of visitors. One way to get visitors’ information is by utilizing surveys in the form of questionnaires or interviews.
This is most often used to collect demographic information,
reason for visiting the museum, visiting frequency, as well
as general satisfaction, visitor motivations and ways for
improvement [7]. However, questionnaires are of limited
use in helping to develop the organization of the museum.
They cannot be used to inform of the movement patterns of
visitors or of their specific preferences.
A different approach to understand visitors uses observations of how visitors behave at the museum as a way to
provide evidence-based feedback to curators and exhibit

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

designers. The main idea is that observations are objective
and reflect the true interest of visitors. These observations
can be used to deduce user’s preference and improve
exhibit design. Initial observational studies were based on
unobtrusive manual observations, tracking the movement
and behavior of visitors in the area of an exhibition, producing maps of the tracks showing the ‘‘hot’’ and ‘‘cold’’
spots in the exhibition. Nowadays, museum researchers use
observations to examine various measures such as visitors’
circulation [8], use of signage and labels [9], interaction
with exhibits [3] and social interaction [10]. Using manual
tracking and timing of visitors’ behavior using unobtrusive
observations, museum researchers have measured variables
such as: the total time in an area, total number of stops,
proportion of visitors who stop at a specific exhibit, visitors’ path, time of non-exhibit-related behavior and level of
engagement with the exhibit [2, 3]. Summarizing these
variables while focusing on visitors’ interaction with
exhibits, two measures attraction power and holding power
are often used in museum studies [1, 6, 11]. Together these
variables effectively capture how thoroughly visitors were
engaged with an exhibit:
•

•

Attraction power indicates the relative amount of
people who have stopped in front of an exhibit during
their visit. It is calculated by dividing the number of
people who stop, by the total number of people who
have visited the museum. This measure provides us
with an initial idea of the power of attraction of the
exhibit.
Holding power measures the average time spent in front
of an exhibit. It is calculated by summing up the time a
visitor spent in front of a specific exhibit. This measure
provides us with an initial idea of the power of an
exhibit to hold the interest of a visitor.

These measures play a decisive analytical role since
they are preconditions for learning and non-learning situations. They identify important places in the museum
where production of meaning takes place [1].
2.2 Indoor movement visualization
The analysis of human movement patterns to date (both
vehicle movements and movements done on foot) is typically focused on outdoor urban environments, mostly using
information taken from GPS devices. A comprehensive
taxonomy of movement data, provided by Dodge et al.
[12], describes movement behavior based on single, multiple and complex relations among moving objects.
Andrienko et al. [13, 14] describe a conceptual framework
for tasks and methods involved in the analysis of movement, which can be distinguished by the type of information targeted and by the level of analysis. Lately, indoor

315

spatial information systems have drawn attention due to the
increase use of wireless sensor networks, causing indoor
movement data to become more widespread [15]. However, the applicability of geographic movement data analysis and visualization to indoor analysis is not trivial, due
to the different type of data collected, the complexity of the
environment and the different user tasks involved.
While there are several commercial systems for indoor
positioning on the market today, there is no single standard
and there is a wide range of indoor positioning systems
used. These systems use various technologies such as
magnetic positioning, dead reckoning, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth,
radio frequency (RF) and more. Still, the predominant
method with most technologies is to examine the position
of a mobile sensor attached to the user, such as existing
sensors on the user’s phone, as compared with fixed Beacons which positions are known. The location is then calculated using some sort of wireless sensor network (WSN).
For an overall survey on indoor positioning systems and
technologies, see [16, 17], while Kuflik et al. [18] provide a
survey of indoor positioning systems used at museums.
One of the main differences between indoor and outdoor
movement data is that indoor movement data are often
discrete and episodic.
Unlike GPS data that can provide near-continuous
movement information, proximity detection to known
locations creates incomplete spatial and temporal data,
which can make it difficult to provide accurate movement
trajectories. Given the incomplete spatiotemporal data,
various methods were used to visualize indoor positioning
data. Andrienko et al. [19] clustered evacuation traces of a
multi-floored building, leading to interesting insights about
behavior and outliers. Another line of research focused on
the assessment of spatiotemporal patterns with the help of
dense pixel displays, called growth ring maps [20]. In this
visualization technique, every pixel encodes an event or an
object laid out in an orbital manner that encodes the temporal sequence, and uses color for the seasonal time differences. As the authors state, this technique is capable of
capturing spatial and temporal properties of the data
simultaneously. Girgensohn et al. [21] examine traffic flow
and patterns of indoor activity in order to provide a better
arrangement and staff allocation to retail establishments.
They have developed visualization techniques that generate
presentations to investigate traffic flow that were represented on multiple interlinked views, such as temporal
charts and heatmaps.
Analysis of user behavior in virtual environments uses
log data of avatar movements to visualize information such
as movement patters and congestions [22], social patterns
[23] and overall movements of participants. In [18], a tool
for visual analysis of navigation patterns of users in virtual
environments was designed. The focus was on navigation

123

316

and trajectory analysis, showing individual paths as well as
group flows. As part of the tool, heatmaps of aggregated
data for overall time spent at different areas were drawn, as
well as places in which users travelled more than once.
Similarly, in [24], individual players’ spatiotemporal
movements were visualized to show paths and strategies in
a gaming virtual environment. While we used similar
visualizations to show trajectory analysis, the data used in
these studies are quite different than ours. Specifically, in a
virtual environment, there are complete logs of all movements, orientations and behavior of avatars; in a real
museum environment, such as the one we used, only discreet positioning data of visitors are available.
2.3 Visitor behavior analysis and visualization
Lately, automatic tracking and positioning technologies
make way into museums, usually as means of providing a
better infrastructure to enhance the performance of mobile
visitor’s guides. Zancanaro et al. [25] used automatically
generated logs of visitor positioning to validate a previous
categorization of visitors’ behavior, following the work of
Veron and Levasseur [26] that used ethnographical observations to categorize visitor movements into four category
styles: an ant visitor who tends to follow a specific path and
spends a lot of time observing most exhibits. A fish who
moves around in the center of the room and usually avoids
looking at exhibits’ details; the butterfly visitor does not
follow a specific path but rather is guided by the physical
orientation of the exhibits and stops frequently to look for
more information; and finally, the grasshopper visitor
seems to have a specific preference for some preselected
exhibits and spends a lot of time observing them while
tending to ignore the others. Zancanaro et al. [25] validated
these categories using clustering of automatically generated positioning of visitors. Dim and Kuflik [27] followed
the footsteps of the previous work to monitor and analyzed
types of group social behavior in museums. They identified
six different types of group behaviors: Doves who are
interested in each other while ignoring the environment,
mirkats that stand side by side, expressing great interest in
the exhibits, parrots that share their attention between
exhibits and their group members, geese, that have one
group member follow the other, lone wolves that separate
and wonder alone and penguins that cross the space ignore
the exhibits, heading somewhere. Lanir et al. [28] used
positioning data of visitors at the museum to compare the
behavior of visitors who used a mobile guide in their visit
with those who did not. They found that users using a
mobile guide spent overall more time at the museum,
dedicated more time to marked places, and were less
socially engaged with their peers as compared to visitors
who did not use the mobile guide.

123

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

Looking at visualizing visitors’ behavior, Kanda et al.
[29] used spatial clustering to show visiting patterns and
estimate visitors’ trajectories. Using information gathered
from RFID tags (identified by RFID readers at various
locations), a heatmap visualization of where participants
lingered and various trajectory patterns were identified.
Lanir et al. [30] designed static visualizations to enable
analysis of museum visitors’ behavior based on a novel
glyph design. They provided novel visualizations for
engagement patterns, visitors’ circulation and a temporal
flow of a visit. However, feedback from curators revealed
that these novel presentations were somewhat difficult to
comprehend. Curators required simpler, more intuitive
views. In addition, both of these solutions employed disparate, static views. In the current work, we take a different
approach, using a user-centered design approach in
designing a complete interactive system, built on top of a
visitor database to enable a more generalizable system with
easy access and understanding of visitors’ behavior.

3 Requirement gathering
In order to understand the information needs of museum
personnel, we started our user-centered design process with
a requirements gathering stage, in which we interviewed
curators and other museum people from two major museums. The first museum was the Hecht1 museum, a small- to
medium-sized museum containing both archeological and
art exhibits located at the campus of the University of
Haifa, with which we worked closely during the entire
project. At the Hecht museum, we interviewed six persons
including the museum director and main curator, the
assistant director, the director of the education activities
and three other personnel. To get input from people at a
larger institution, we also interviewed two curators from
the Israel Museum—a world-class leading art and archeology museum, featuring a 20-acre campus and over
50,000 objects. This gave us the perspectives of both large
and small institutions. Finally, we also interviewed the
CEO of Espro Acoustiguide Group,2 a leading provider of
museum mobile guides solutions with clients in many
museums worldwide.
We conducted open-ended interviews in which we asked
participants if and how they track and understand visitors’
behaviors today, whether they would be interested in a
system for visualizing such behavior and what are they
interested in. Questions focused on their own specific
museum, as well as on their general opinions of the use of
such a system in other museums, given the fact that these
1
2

http://mushecht.haifa.ac.il/Default_eng.aspx.
http://www.acoustiguide.com/.

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

are people that have much experience with museum work.
During the interviews, all participants agreed that in their
museums as well as most museums they know of, there is a
lack in evaluation of visitors’ behavior, and they do not
gather much visitors’ data as they would like to. Participants mentioned that being able to analyze various
behavior patterns is of high interest to both curators and
museum administrators.
The following topics for analysis of visitor behavior
have emerged from the interviews:
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

General engagement of the visitors at the exhibit and
room level. All interviewees agreed that one of the
most important tasks is to understand general visitors’
engagement including holding and attraction power
both at the exhibition (room) and the exhibit level.
This includes the percentage of time that the visitor
was engaged with digital content (through the mobile
guide).
Circulation and general movement patterns of visitors
between rooms. Especially in museums with various
movement options, curators were interested to learn
what paths visitors took, especially in places where
visitors have various choices.
Temporal analysis of individuals and small group visit.
Curators were also interested in analyzing individual
visits and small groups’ visits, examining the order of
exhibits visited, time spent in each exhibit and small
groups’ patterns.
Demographic and time-based segmentations. This may
include various visitors’ demographic segmentations,
including age, education, income level, language,
group composition (arriving at the museum) as well
as information on why people came to the museum and
previous visit history. Museum personnel were interested in tying demographic information in relation to
visiting days and times, as well as to general engagement. This information is useful mostly for marketing
purposes.
Organized groups and educational activities. Most
museums have various groups and tours, and organize
various educational activates for these groups (some
groups come with their own guides). Curators were
interested in knowing the engagement and movement
patterns of these groups, both for coordination purposes (to avoid crowding places), and to see whether
the guide’s lead follows the museum agendas.

Following our analysis of the interviews, we designed a
system to address these requirements. Since our data did
not include organized groups, and included only minimal
demographic information, we did not address point number
five, and addressed point number four only when we had
relevant data. We iterated on our design ideas with the

317

museum personnel from the Hecht museum (whom which
we collaborated more closely with), receiving feedback
throughout the design process until we reached our final
designs. The next session describes the infrastructure we
employed at the museum in order to gather user data,
followed by the description of the system.

4 System description
For tracking visitor’s location at the museum, a positioning
system based on RFIDs was used saving visitor positioning
into a database [18, 31]. The user interface was built as a
Web client connecting to the database, in order for it to
work from any browser on any computer. HTML5 and
JavaScript were used as programming languages, with D3
the visualization library used to produce the visualizations.
We first describe the infrastructure of the system including
the positioning system, followed by a description of the
data processing. We then describe the system’s main
modules: individual visitor analysis, small group analysis,
aggregated information and mobile guide usage.
4.1 Infrastructure and data collection
In the framework of the project, the Hecht museum was
equipped with a radio frequency (RF)-based positioning
system, based on a wireless sensor network (WSN) (see
[18] for details). Figure 1 shows the details of the positioning system. Beacons are statically located at all
entrances and exits of the museum, as well as near points of
interest in the museum that include most important exhibits
as were defined by the museum manager. The visitors carry
small matchbox-sized sensors called Blinds that transmit
information to the server twice per second. When a Blind is
in proximity of a Beacon (determining location), the
information that is sent to the server from that Blind
includes the Beacon ID, determining that the visitor was in
proximity to that known location. While providing a reasonable indoor positioning solution, the system’s major

Fig. 1 Positioning system equipment and usage scenario

123

318

weakness is that it only knows when a person is in proximity to a Beacon, not being able to detect position in
transition from one Beacon to another. Thus, the system
provides discrete rather than continuous movement data. A
research prototype of a location-aware mobile museum
guide that used the positioning system to provide multimedia presentations on various locations was developed
and then converted into a working museum visitors’ guide.
The guide was handed off to regular museum visitors
visiting the museum, with data collected for a period of six
months (visitors also filled up a short questionnaire),
enabling us to gather complete log data of these visitors.
Log data were gathered for analysis of 423 visitors (194
females). Average age of visitors was 43.2 years
(SD = 18.4). We cleaned and imported these logs into a
database, for the use of the system. Participants were regular museum visitors who were offered free use of the PIL
mobile guide during their visit. Visits shorter than 15 min
were discarded as being too short to analyze. Positioning
messages from visitors’ Blinds were saved in a database
and later preprocessed and cleaned. In RFID-based systems, information is often missing or unreliable; however,
it is possible to use the high correlation between messages
both in time and space to clean the data through spatial and
temporal aggregation [32]. In our case, we aggregated
reading of the Blinds’ data by running a sliding window
average on the data stream, defining a visitor as detected in
a certain position only when a certain amount of messages
within the sliding window was above a threshold. Similarly, a user was defined as leaving a position when the
number of messages that were not in that position (empty
or another position) was above a (different) predefined
threshold. The values of the thresholds were determined by
experimentations. This provided us with a list of time
intervals of exhibits for each visitor starting from the
beginning of the visit.
4.2 Individual visitor analysis
Some museums have preferred paths—the paths they think
most visitors would or should follow. Other museums have
a more open-ended approach in which visitors are expected
to wander around the museum as they wish. The Hecht
museum is of the later kind. In both cases, however, it is of
interest to see visitors’ paths and to understand how visitors
traverse the museum space. In the first case, it is important
to see whether visitors actually take the expected path and
where visitors diverse from it. When an exhibition is
organized in a certain way, visitors who take the ‘‘wrong’’
directions may feel confused and may not understand the
curator’s interpretation. In the second case, it is important

123

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

to analyze the choices of visitors in order to understand for
example, why they are going or not going to certain areas.
The individual visitor’s view allows seeing an individual
user’s route during his or her visit at the museum. The
route is shown on top of the museum map. The view
enables ‘‘playing’’ the path of the visitor, which uses a
footstep icon that moves on the map and emulates the
visitor’s path (each second is mapped to a minute of the
visit). The animation does not linger in places where the
user stopped. Instead, times spent at different locations are
represented by a circle, with the circle size mapped to the
time spent at that location. The user can fast forward the
view to the end where the entire path is seen (Fig. 2). In
addition, a list of exhibits, times spent at each exhibit, time
between exhibits and a list of presentations seen by that
visitor on the mobile museum guide are available on the
right side of the view. When the user selects an exhibit
from the list, the timeline on the map view (and the partial
path till then) jumps to the time the user was at that exhibit.
4.3 Small group view
Many visitors arrive at the museum in small groups, usually
of family and friends [33]. It is important for museums to be
able to cater and understand small groups and not only
individuals [34]. The group analysis view enables seeing the
behavior of a small group of visitors arriving together. The
first available view (not shown here) plots the path of each
member of the group on the map, similar to the individual
view presented in Fig. 2, with each member of the group
having a different color. However, this does not show the
temporal aspect of the visit, and it may be difficult to
understand when each group member visited each place. For
example, if two lines are overlapping, it does not mean that
visitors were at the same exhibit at the same time. Thus, we
offer a complimentary view to understand the temporal
aspect of the group visit in a timeline view of a small group
visit (Fig. 3). This view is also available for a single visitor’s
visit. The view charts the time (starting from the start time of
the visit) on the x-axis, and each exhibition room on the
y-axis. Each visitor is presented with a different color, and
time spent at each exhibit within each exhibition room is
shown, with exact time given with a tooltip upon hover. For
example, for the group of two visitors shown in Fig. 3, it is
easy to see that visitors started visiting the museum together
and spent time together at the first exhibition. At about 12:52,
they parted with the ‘‘blue’’ visitor going to a different
exhibition. From there on, the visit was mostly separated till
the visitors joined back in the first exhibition room at the end
of the visit. Hovering over an area shows the exact times
spend in that area.

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

319

Fig. 2 Individual visitor view (color figure online)

Fig. 3 Temporal view of small group visiting times in each exhibition (color figure online)

4.4 Aggregated views
The aggregated views show overall visitors’ information at
the museum. The map-based engagement view shows
visitor engagement in terms of holding power and attraction power per exhibit (Fig. 4). It shows the information in
a spatial view on top of the museum map. The blue circles
show the percentage of visitors visiting that location out of
all visitors at the museum (attraction power). The gray
opaque circles show the average time spent at that location

(holding power). It is possible to show either the attraction
power or the holding power independently, or to show
them together as shown in Fig. 4. In addition, it is possible
to filter the data according to age range, sex or language
used in the mobile guide (the mobile guide supports three
different languages—Hebrew, Arabic and English). The
image can show various patterns of different behaviors at
different exhibits. For example, looking at Fig. 4, the
location annotated with ‘‘1’’ (annotation in red are not part
of the visualization) is the entrance to the museum.

123

320

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

Fig. 4 Visitor engagement. Blue circles show number of visits at a location (attraction power), and gray opaque circles show amount of time in
each location (holding power). In addition, several filters are available (color figure online)

Because explanations and initial use of the mobile guide
was performed there, both attraction power (every visitor
starts there) and holding power there are high. Locations 2
and 3 are at the corridor in which visitors go through to
enter the museum. This explains both the high attraction
and holding power. Location 4 is the main decision point of
the museum where visitors decide whether to go to the left
exhibit, straight ahead or up the stairs (to the right). That
can explain the high attraction power and relative moderate
holding power. Exhibits 5 and 6 show two points in the
main attraction of the museum—a 2400-year-old merchant
ship wreck that was recovered, preserved and put on display at the museum. Thus, the high holding power of point
6 is not surprising. Finally, location 7 shows the second
floor. It can be seen that very few visitors visit the second
floor—a point for concern for the museum staff. Figure 5
shows the same view, using a heatmap drawn for the
attraction power, showing the ‘‘hot’’ and ‘‘cold’’ zones of
the museum. Similarly, it is possible to show a heatmap
view according to the holding power. The heatmap can
nicely demonstrate the popular areas that users went to and
what places they avoid. For example, it is easy to see that
the second floor (on the right side of Fig. 5) is rarely
attended. In general, attraction power can be explained by
various phenomena such as popularity of exhibit, limited
visibility of objects (if not attended), demanding reading
material and lighting.

123

In addition to the map-based engagement view, the
system can show the exact numbers for the average time
spent and the percentage of visitors attending (holding and
attraction power) both on the exhibition (room) level and
on the exhibit level (for every exhibit in a room) using a
simple interactive bar chart (see Fig. 6).
To enable analysis of visitors on the hour level to
examine congestion for example, the system shows the
distribution of visitors at the museum according to visitor
hours using a stream graph [35]. Figure 7 shows the distribution of visitors per hour of day at the museum. Each
line color shows the average number of visitors at a different exhibition room. Hovering over the line provides the
name of the room and the number of visitors at that hour.
The overall width of the graph shows the overall number of
visitors at that time at the museum. At the Hecht museum,
opening hours are 10:00 to 16:00 (with Tuesdays open till
18:00). Looking at the graph, we can see that by far, 14:00
is the busiest time at the museum, with most visitors vising
between 13:00 and 15:00.
4.5 Mobile guide usage
The mobile guide usage tab presents views that show how
users used the mobile guide at the museum. While previous
views focused on overall visitors’ movements and
engagement regardless of whether they use the mobile

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

321

Fig. 5 Aggregate view showing heatmap of attraction power at the museum

Fig. 6 Engagement in terms of number of visits and average total time according to exhibition room

museum guide in their visit, the views in this tab show
usage of the mobile guide application, in order to enable
analysis of where it was used, what presentations were

most popular, etc. The mobile guide used at the Hecht
museum allows a choice of 3–10 presentations at each
location (presented as a 1-min multimedia presentation. For

123

322

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

Fig. 7 Distribution of visitors per hour at the different exhibition rooms (color figure online)

Fig. 8 Number of presentations seen at each of the exhibits in a single room

more information, see [28]). Thus, to enable an exhibitcentric view, we show for each exhibition, a stacked bar
chart showing for each exhibit, the number of visitors who
watched each presentation (Fig. 8). Using this chart, the
museum analyzer can look at a specific exhibit and see
which presentations about that exhibit people chose to
watch and listen to. It is also easy to compare locations and
see which locations were more popular with respect to the
usage of the mobile guide.

123

5 Evaluation
For a formal evaluation of the system, we conducted semistructured interviews that included short structured questionnaires, with various museum personnel. We included
personnel from five different museums of various sizes and
topics. Because of lack of time, we did not hand off the
questionnaires to all interviewees. Because the people at
the Hecht museum (where we employed the system)

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

323

Table 1 List of participants in the evaluation
Participant

Role at museum

Museum

Museum size

Questionnaire

P1

Museum director

Tower of David, museum of the history of Jerusalem

Medium

No

P2

Internet and new media director

Tower of David, museum of the history of Jerusalem

Medium

No

P3

Associate curator of archive

Tower of David, museum of the history of Jerusalem

Medium

No

P4

Media curator

The Israel Museum

Large

No

P5

Media analyst

The Israel Museum

Large

No

P6

Curator of print and drawing

Tel Aviv Museum of Art

Large

Yes

P7

Director of education department

Tel Aviv Museum of Art

Large

Yes

P8

Associate curator

Tel Aviv Museum of Art

Large

Yes

P9

Head of curation services department

Tel Aviv Museum of Art

Large

Yes

P10

Project and technology manager

Tel Aviv Museum of Art

Large

No

P11
P12

Associate curator in architecture design
Museum director and head curator

Tel Aviv Museum of Art
Tikotin Museum of Japanese Art

Large
Small

Yes
Yes

participated in the design iterations, we did not include
them in the formal evaluation. Table 1 describes the participants that took part in the evaluation. During the
interviews, we first asked participants about their role in
the museum, followed by questions on whether (and how)
their museum currently gathers information about visitors,
and their opinions of the need for analyzing visitor
behavior. Next, we showed them the system, asking their
opinions on the usefulness of the various features. Finally,
we handed off the questionnaire and asked for their general
opinion, things that might be missing and additional
comments they may have.
5.1 Current information on visitors and need
for the system
In all five museums, we examined (including the Hecht
museum) very little information about the visitors which is
currently being gathered. A few museums (Tower of
David, Hecht) simply said they know nothing about how
visitors behave and interact at their spaces. Still, all
museums count the total number of visitors according to
the number of tickets sold. The larger museums (Tel Aviv
Museum of Art, the Israel Museum) sometimes hire people
to stand at the entrance of exhibitions of interest and count
the number of visitors who enter. Still, they do this on an
opportune basis and only at the level of entire exhibit
rooms. P6 has stated: ‘‘We more or less have the feeling of
what is happening at our exhibits, however, we have no
way of validating it.’’ With respect to the use of mobile
museum visitors’ guide, some museums utilize a mobile
guide (Tel Aviv Museum of Art, the Israel Museum, Tower
of David). These museums count the number of mobile
guide rentals and receive monthly written reports on the
frequency and amount of presentations listened to according to topics. However, very few people use this

information. Finally, some museums periodically hand
willing participants with questionnaires asking of general
interest and satisfaction. These questionnaires include
demographic information and motivational questions, but
do not include self-report on time spent at exhibitions.
5.2 Comments on specific views
We showed participants the main views of the system and
asked for their comments. In addition, on each main screen
(shown in Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8), we asked participants to
use a seven-point Likert scale (1—strongly disagree, 7—
strongly agree), to state their opinions on whether the
visualization was easy to understand, and whether it was
useful. Because of time constraints with several of the
interviews, only 6 out of 12 participants have filled the
questionnaire. Table 2 presents these results.
All participants agreed on the easiness of the individual
view (Fig. 2) saying that a path on the map is very clear.
Participants enjoyed the animation and said that it brings
the visit to life and enables a vivid understanding of a
visitor’s path. Regarding the utility of this view, opinions
were split. While some said this can be very useful by
following many different paths, others said that a single
person is less interesting to view and they would prefer an
aggregation of visitor paths. Similar comments were given
for the small group temporal view (Fig. 3) which was fairly
easy to understand, and which some participants found
useful while others did not think that analysis on the
individual level is too important.
The visitor engagement views were commonly appreciated with almost all participants thinking they were both
useful and important. In particular, participants liked the
map view saying that it is very easy to use it to get an
overall picture of the engagement information. Participants
followed on and said that if they wanted to look at specific

123

324
Table 2 Participants average
opinions (and standard
deviation) on the easiness and
usefulness of the different views

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

View

View is easy to understand

View is useful
3.83 (1.16)

Individual visitor view (Fig. 2)

4.83 (0.41)

Small group temporal view (Fig. 3)

4.66 (0.51)

4.0 (1.09)

Visitor engagement—map (Fig. 4)

4.16 (0.75)

4.33 (0.81)

Visitor engagement per exhibit (Fig. 6)

4.83 (0.41)

4.16 (0.98)

4.0 (0.89)

4.50 (0.54)

Visitor distribution per hour (Fig. 7)

Average responses are given on a seven-point Likert scale with 1 depicting strongly disagree and 7
depicting strongly agree (N = 6)

numbers, they can easily get it from the aggregated bar
graph. Regarding the heatmap, opinions varied with some
participants liking it more and some less so. Participants
said this view is good in conveying which locations visitors
do not reach or are not interested in, and overall areas that
are of more interest.
Regarding the distribution of visitors per hour (Fig. 7),
participants said it was fairly easy to understand, but only
after it was explained (avg 4.0). All participants strongly
agreed this would be very useful (avg 4.5), stating that it is
important to know about crowdedness times and congestions. P1 stated that there are certain days in which the
museum is open late, and other days on which they consider opening late. However, opening more hours has
financial repercussions. It is important for her to know
whether this policy is worthwhile. Thus, in addition to the
current view, enabling to see the distribution of visitors
according hours in different days of the week, as well as
different months, can also be useful in order to perform
other time period analyses.
5.3 General impressions and comments
about the system
Almost all of the participants were very positive about the
system, stating that such a system would be useful at their
museum. Participants commented favorably on the
usability and easiness of the system, saying that it is easy to
understand how to use it. In general, administrators and
department heads (P1, P2, P7, P9, P10, P12) were more
enthusiastic than the curators about the system’s utility.
Most curators said that they are driven by artistic or educational motivations. When designing the exhibitions, they
look at the artistic/domain aspects first, and they are less
interested in the way it affects people. They stated that
often, after they have designed an exhibition, they go on to
their next project and do not reflect on how successful it is,
or how people use it (P8: ‘‘A temporary exhibition won’t
change after you deploy it, and understanding how it is
used by the public would not help me in my next exhibition, since they are each very different. My main reason to
analyze behavior would be to satisfy my curiosity’’).

123

Museum administrators and directors, on the other hand,
were much more enthusiastic. Museum administrators are
much more interested in practical issues such as how to
bring more visitors to the museum, how to enhance the
enjoyment of current visitors and how to manage the current stream of visitors. These question are all part of the
exhibition design which affects general public behavior
and ultimately the visitor’s experience. For example P9
stated: ‘‘some exhibitions cost a fortune. We really need to
know if this expenditure was worthwhile.’’
On the downside, several participants stated that visitor’s engagement patterns do not provide a full understanding of the value of that experience to visitors. For
example, visitors might stay for a long time in a certain
place only because there was a chair near that exhibit. The
fact that people stayed there does not necessarily say that
people were engaged with the exhibit, yet alone learn from
it. For example, P8 said that the tool was a quantitative one,
but that she often wanted qualitative information. Popularity is not always an indicator of quality, and in her
opinion, her museum is a cultural institute rather than a
commercial one which is committed to quality. Thus, she
was less interested in visitor behavior.
When asked about possible improvements or additions
to the current system, some participants (mostly from the
administrative side) said that they were interested in having
more demographic information such as age, income and
address. They would like to be able to use existing views,
as well as simple measures such as overall visit time, and
see the distribution according to different demographic
parameters. A second improvement that was mentioned is
to be able to see aggregated paths. In the current views,
only a single visitor’s path is displayed. Participants said it
could be useful to have the aggregated paths and thus see
the overall major paths in the museum.

6 Discussion and conclusions
In this work, we presented a framework to enable museums
to analyze and evaluate the behavior of their visitors. With
the advent of technology, indoor tracking is becoming a

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326

simple commodity [36]. It is easy today to buy off-the-shelf
Beacons (e.g., Estimote3) and place them at points of
interest at museums. Other indoor positioning technologies
are being developed, and further easy-to-implement solutions are soon likely to appear, creating simple systems that
would provide rich data on visitor’s movements. We presented a system that utilizes these data for the benefit of
museum practitioners, visualizing various visitors’ behaviors at the museum. Museum practitioners can use the
system to investigate what happens at the museum by
looking at the paths of individual visitors, small groups of
visitors or general aggregated information.
Exhibit designers and curators need to make many decisions regarding the placement of exhibits, the way they are
presented and the way they present the interpretations for the
exhibits. This is not a simple task, and every decision can
have consequences on the way visitors perceive the exhibition. For example, a single showcase may be skipped by
visitors because of the large number of pieces it may contain,
regardless of their importance or elegance or since it is
simply partially hidden by other exhibits. Visualizing
behavior patterns at the museum reflects the time spent, the
paths taken and, overall, the non-verbal behavior of visitors.
This allows to assess different hypotheses that were made on
exhibit arrangements. This allows to assess different
hypotheses that were made on exhibit arrangements, for
example, whether a certain route is followed, an item is
looked at, or whether a visitor spends time to read a certain
panel [1]. This, in turn, can help to evaluate the complex
interaction between the visitor, the museum space, and the
exhibits as were designed by museum staff.
From our interviews and observations of current
museum practitioner practices, we have seen that there is a
lack in analysis of visitor behavior in current museums.
Museum curators invest a huge amount of effort in
designing and constructing the small details of the exhibitions, yet rarely follow up on their exhibitions to see how
they affected their audiences. This discrepancy may be
caused by the lack of existing measurement tools or by the
oversight of curators who often focus more on the artistic
and initial design of the exhibits. Still, most museum
directors and administrators understand the need for a
better visitor-centric examination of current exhibitions,
and were very enthusiastic about having a tool to provide
such information. We believe that a system, such as the one
presented here, can be an invaluable measurement tool for
both museum administrators and curators to identify
missing or less explored places, challenging paths, popular
areas, etc. There is no conflict between the artistic design of
an exhibition and its measurement. The fact that an exhibit
is not popular does not mean it is not important or should
3

http://estimote.com/indoor/.

325

be removed, but this should be known and considered as
one of the factors when examining the exhibition.
A limitation with a behavior-based system, which was
also highlighted in the evaluation, is that observations alone
are not able to assess the visitors’ cognitive or learning
processes, or to evaluate the museum’s ability to convey
knowledge and construct meaning and significance. This is a
general limitation of any tool that is based on behavioral data
[1]. Still, the strength of the system is in its ability to reflect
and hopefully influence the preconditions that make museums construct meaning. In order for an exhibition to be able
to affect visitors, it has to first be noticed and then be looked
at by the visitors for a sufficient amount of time. For a mobile
guide presentation to be effective and convey knowledge, it
has to first be heard. Our system provides a simple tool that
enables reflection on these issues. Furthermore, the use of the
system does not preclude the simultaneous use of other data
collection techniques such as questionnaires or interviews to
supplement observational insights and enable comparison of
observational facts with perceptions and opinions of visitors.
Another important point is the issue of privacy. As the
use of mobile technology grows and as mobile technology is
used more and more to track users and collect different types
of personal information, privacy issues need to be taken into
account. When considering the collection of personal
information of museum visitors, it seems that visitors should
be notified, informed and either given the option to opt in or
out. In such a system or study as described in this article,
there is no need to maintain the identity of the individual
visitor. However, visitors’ identification may be beneficial
for follow-up activities. These aspects need to be carefully
considered, as visitors may refrain from allowing systems to
track them, but if they are rewarded with a mobile museum
visitors’ guide application, they may agree and even may
allow to be identified and contacted later.
We evaluated the system with museum staff from several indoor museums of various domain areas. Obviously,
the movement of visitors and the possible insights gained
would be different from one museum to another. A
museum that has one main recommended path would see
different patterns and examine different things than a
museum that allows visitors to wander around freely. Still,
we believe that most kinds of museums can benefit in
different ways. Science museums, for example, can especially benefit from understanding engagement patterns,
since their exhibits are designed to be engaging and
interactive. In a science museum, there is a clear correlation between a successful exhibit and visitor engagement
with that exhibit. While the system was specifically
designed for indoor museums, it can be applicable to other
indoor scenarios, in which proximity-based indoor tracking
is used, such as tracing medical personnel in hospitals, or
tracking of users in shopping centers. Similar to the way

123

326

e-commerce Web sites track every user’s click mouse
movement and page dwell times, brick-and-mortar shops
are starting to be interested in tracking visitor engagement
within the shop. While domain-specific adjustments would
need to be done, we believe that the framework presented
here can be used in other such scenarios.
Finally, several improvements to the system have been
suggested in the evaluation. First, a screen that would show
the aggregated paths of all visitors can help show the
overall main paths and the directions that visitors take.
Second, an addition to the visitor distribution was suggested, extending the view to show distribution per day of
the week, and day in the month. Our future work includes
adding these views as well as deploying the system at a
major museum.

References
1. Bollo A, Dal Pozzolo L (2005, July) Analysis of visitor behaviour
inside the museum: an empirical study. In: Proceedings of the 8th
international conference on arts and cultural management
2. Klein HJ (1993) Tracking visitor circulation in museum settings.
Environ Behav 25(6):782–800
3. Yalowitz SS, Bronnenkant K (2009) Timing and tracking:
unlocking visitor behavior. Visit Stud 12(1):47–64
4. Chianese A, Marulli F, Piccialli F, Benedusi P, Jung JE (2016)
An associative engines based approach supporting collaborative
analytics in the internet of cultural things. Futur Gener Comput
Syst 66(1):187–198
5. Chianese A, Piccialli F, Valente I (2015) Smart environments and
cultural heritage: a novel approach to create intelligent cultural
spaces. J Locat Based Serv 9(3):209–234
6. Hooper-Greenhill E (2006) Studying visitors. In: Macdonald S
(ed) A companion to museum studies. Wiley, pp 362–376
7. Dickenson V (1992) Museum visitor surveys: an overview,
1930–1990. Cultural economics. Springer, Berlin, pp 141–150
8. Bitgood S (2006) An analysis of visitor circulation: movement
patterns and the general value principle. Curator Mus J
49(4):463–475
9. McManus PM (1989) Oh, yes, they do: How museum visitors read
labels and interact with exhibit texts. Curator Mus J 32(3):174–189
10. Leinhardt G, Knutson K (2004) Listening in on museum conversations. Rowman Altamira, Lanham
11. Serrell B (1997) Paying attention: the duration and allocation of
visitors’ time in museum exhibitions. Curator Mus J 40(2):108–125
12. Dodge S, Weibel R, Lautenschutz A (2008) Towards a taxonomy
of movement patterns. Inf Vis 7(3–4):240
13. Andrienko G, Andrienko N, Bak P, Keim D, Kisilevich S, Wrobel
S (2011) A conceptual framework and taxonomy of techniques
for analyzing movement. J Vis Lang Comput 22(3):213–232
14. Andrienko N, Andrienko G (2012) Visual analytics of movement:
an overview of methods, tools and procedures. Inf Vis 12(1):3–24
15. Harle Robert (2013) A survey of indoor inertial positioning
systems for pedestrians. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor
15(3):1281–1293
16. Curran K, Furey E, Lunney T, Santos J, Woods D, McCaughey A
(2011) An evaluation of indoor location determination technologies. J Locat Based Serv 5(2):61–78

123

Pers Ubiquit Comput (2017) 21:313–326
17. Gu Y, Lo A, Niemegeers I (2009) A survey of indoor positioning
systems for wireless personal networks. IEEE Commun Surv
Tutor 11(1):13–32
18. Kuflik T, Lanir J, Dim E, Wecker A, Corra M, Zancanaro M, Stock
O (2011) Indoor positioning: challenges and solutions for indoor
cultural heritage sites. In: Proceedings of the 16th international
conference on intelligent user interfaces. ACM, pp 375–378
19. Andrienko G, Andrienko N, Rinzivillo S, Nanni M, Pedreschi D,
Giannotti F (2009) Interactive visual clustering of large collections of trajectories. In: IEEE symposium on visual analytics
science and technology, VAST 2009. IEEE, pp 3–10
20. Bak P, Mansmann F, Janetzko H, Keim D (2009) Spatiotemporal
analysis of sensor logs using growth ring maps. IEEE Trans Vis
Comput Graph 15(6):913–920
21. Girgensohn A, Shipman F, Wilcox L (2008) Determining activity
patterns in retail spaces through video analysis. In: Proceedings
of the 16th ACM international conference on multimedia. ACM,
pp 889–892
22. Chittaro L, Ranon R, Ieronutti L (2006) VU-flow: a visualization tool
for analyzing navigation in virtual environments. Special issue on
visual analytics. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph 12(6):1475–1485
23. Börner K, Penumarthy S (2003) Social diffusion patterns in threedimensional virtual worlds. Inf Vis 2(3):182–198
24. Hoobler N, Humhpreys G, Agrawala M. (2004) Visualizing
competitive behaviors in multi-user virtual environments. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE visualization conference 2004. IEEE
Press, pp 163–170
25. Zancanaro M, Kuflik T, Boger Z, Goren-Bar D, Goldwasser D
(2007) Analyzing museum visitors’ behavior patterns. User
modeling 2007. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 238–246
26. Veron E, Levasseur M (1983) Ethnographie de l’exposition.
Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris
27. Dim E, Kuflik T (2015) Automatic detection of social behavior of
museum visitor pairs. ACM Trans Interact Intell Syst 4(4):17
28. Lanir J, Kuflik T, Dim E, Wecker AJ, Stock O (2013) The
influence of a location-aware mobile guide on museum visitors’
behavior. Interact Comput 25(6):443–460
29. Kanda T, Shiomi M, Perrin L, Nomura T, Ishiguro H, Hagita N
(2007) Analysis of people trajectories with ubiquitous sensors in
a science museum. In: IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation, 2007. IEEE, pp 4846–4853
30. Lanir J, Bak P, Kuflik T (2014) Visualizing proximity-based
spatiotemporal behavior of museum visitors using tangram diagrams. Comput Graph Forum 33(3):261–270
31. Kuflik T, Wecker AJ, Lanir J, Stock O (2015) An integrative
framework for extending the boundaries of the museum visit
experience: linking the pre, during and post visit phases. Inf
Technol Tour 15(1):17–47
32. Jeffery SR, Alonso G, Franklin MJ, Hong W, Widom J (2005) A
pipelined framework for online cleaning of sensor data streams.
Comput Sci
33. Falk JH, Dierking LD (2012) Museum experience revisited. Left
Coast Press, Walnut Creek
34. Aoki PM, Grinter RE, Hurst A, Szymanski MH, Thornton JD,
Woodruff A (2002) Sotto voce: exploring the interplay of conversation and mobile audio spaces. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM,
pp 431–438
35. Havre S, Hetzler E, Whitney P, Nowell L (2002) Themeriver:
visualizing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE
Trans Vis Comput Graph 8(1):9–20
36. Sykes ER, Pentland S, Nardi S (2015) Context-aware mobile apps
using iBeacons: towards smarter interactions. In: Proceedings of
the 25th annual international conference on computer science and
software engineering. IBM Corp., pp 120–129

