Tokyo University Digital Museum

Noboru Koshizuka

Information Technology Center/The University Museum, The University of Tokyo

koshizuka@l.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Ken Sakamura

Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies/The University Museum, The 
University of Tokyo

sakamura@um.u-tokyo.ac.jp


Abstract

We  present  our  basic  philosophy  and  concept  of
Tokyo University Digital Museum.  The main goal of our
activity is to propose new forms of museums of the future
in  which  digital  technologies  support  all  kinds  of
museum  activities  such  as  gathering,  preserving,
researching,   exhibiting,   and   educating   about
collections.  Further,  we  report  our  novel  digital
technologies for the digital museum such as media and
human interface technologies for new exhibition styles
and data processing technologies for digital archiving of
cultural or historical materials. Lastly, we conclude with
observation for the museum of the future.

1. Introduction

For around 2,300 years since Ancient Alexander Era,
museum has been a facility to restore intellectual and
cultural property of human kind and to inherit them to
posterity [1].   Generally, museums have two kinds of
functions: the primary and the secondary functions. The
primary function is to acquire, classify, preserve, and
research  collections.   The  second  function  is  the
educational   activity   using   collections   including
exhibitions.   Recently,  adopting  digital  technologies,
advancing these two major functions of museums, and
bringing  much  higher  functions  are  expected.   To
accomplis h these goals, we have proposed a new style of
museum, called “Digital Museum”, which utilizes digital
technologies in all of its activities [1].

The  digital  technologies  would  be  useful  for
advancing both functions of museum. As for the primary
function, digital archive is the most effective method.
Whatever  the  condition  of  collection  preservation  in
museums is good, the collection will certainly deteriorate
with  time.   The  only  way  to  preserve  the  current
conditions of collections is to measure in accurate by
means of various scanners and sensors, and to record and
store the measurement data in digital formats.  By digital
technologies, we can make perfect copies of these data
easily.  If we would make backups of the digital data

properly, we can theoretically preserve the records of the
current  conditions  of  museum  collections  without
deterioration forever.

The second function, especially museum exhibition, is
expected to change drastically by means of multimedia and
networking technologies.  These  technologies include
virtual museums built upon hypermedia systems in the
Internet  such  as  WWW  and,  more  innovatively,
networked  3D  virtual  environments.  These  virtual
exhibitions  supplement  the  limit  of  conventional  real
exhibitions.

Furthermore, the both functions in museums have
been contradictory.  The objective of preservation is
future use, but if those materials are used, a deterioration
in the state of preservation is more or less unavoidable.
For this problem, the digital technology can provide one
solution to improve this situation: utilization of digital data.

As seen above, digital museums have a potential to
change the way of museum collection preservation and
exhibition  in  drastic.   Furthermore,  they  will  bring  a
revolution  to  all  museum  activities  such  as  curation,
management, and business models.  We have started
“Tokyo University Digital Museum” by applying these
concepts to our university museums in the University of
Tokyo.  The rest of this paper makes a brief overview of
the basic concept of the Digital Museum, and the result of
our feasibility study in these five years.

2. History and Background

In this section, we briefly present the history and
background of Tokyo University Digital Museum.  Our
university, the University of Tokyo, has established its
university museum in 1966.  Its main mission was to
provide  the  primary  function  of  museums:  collecting,
preserving, and studying objects.  It consisted of ten
sections from humanities to natural sciences, and worked
as a center of academic materials preservation.  In 1996,
our museum has been reorganized, and a new mission, the
second  function  of  museums  including  frequent
exhibitions, has been added.  Simultaneously, our Tokyo


University Digital Museum project has started as its
leading project.  Our mission is to construct a digital
archive of Tokyo University Collection, which consists of
more than six millions of academic materials.  Another
mission is to create an innovative museum that fully
utilizes digital technologies.  Since 1996, on the basis of
the  digital  museum  concept,  we  have  made  six
experimental exhibitions in our university that would cover
various research fields [2,3,4,5,6,7].

3. Concept

Digital  Museum  is  a  museum  that  utilizes  digital
technologies in its all activities. This section proposes the
five challenging concepts of Digital Museum.

3.1. Museum with digital archives

The first concept of Digital Museum is a digital archive.
There are two backgrounds of the digital archive. First, it
is the only practical way to record and preserve current
states  of  museum  collections  without  deterioration.
Seconds, it provides a method to solve the well-known
contradictory between preservation and exhibition, by
utilizing  the stored data in digital archives.  Hence, the
concept of digital archive was born, in which we capture
almost all features of materials, translate them into digital
data, preserve them electronically, and utilize them for
public education or academic researches.

From the past, records have been taken to preserve the
information of materials. Typical examples are paintings,
miniature models, photographs and movies, all of which
are analog information.  However, it is unavoidable that
the recording media deteriorate with time. In addition, it is
impossible for copies of analog records to be made at the
same fidelity level as the original records, and in this case,
deterioration in repeated copies is unavoidable.

In contrast, perfect copies of digital data can be made
without any loss of information.  Whether the media on
which information is recorded be an optical disk or a
magnetic  disk,  the  information might be lost or mis -
recorded over time. However, by using the digital coding
theory and using redundant information, it is also possible
to discover such errors and then correct them. This draws
the total error rate close to zero.  Then, by regularly
renewing data by copying that information itself onto a
new medium, permanent preservation of data becomes
theoretically possible.

On the other hands, preservation and exhibition have
remained to be the major requirements of museums since
ancient times. However, they have been contradictory.
The objective of preservation is future use, but if those
materials  are  used,  deterioration  in  the  state  of
preservation is unavoidable. In this case, if it is adequate
enough to obtain only information, not having to take out

actual collections is important in terms of preventing their
deterioration. Digital archive will contribute to this process.
In other words, digital archive promotes the effective use
of actual collections, while at the same time reducing the
necessity of using actual items, thereby protecting the
actual items.

3.2. Three kinds of openness

Here, we present three kinds of openness, which has
not been fully solved until today while it has been
required for museums from the past. We are recognizing
that digital technologies are effective to solving this.

3.2.1. Open cases. The reason museums look up exhibits
in glass cases is not for the benefit of visitors, obviously,
but to protect the collection. Ideally, visitors should be
able to touch the exhibits with their own hands, the better
to understand them. In the case of solid objects such as
pottery, they should be able to feel the shape. In the case
of ancient writings, they should be able to take out and to
leaf it at their own pace. It would be nice to try playing
ancient instruments or striking an old temple bell to hear
its sound. On the contrary, the use of materials must be
restricted to prevent them from being damaged. From a
security standpoint as well, valuable collections need to
be protected from the hand of the public.  The Digital
Museum aims to satisfy both needs, that of preserving
collections and that of making them readily available, by
taking advantage of digital technologies.

3.2.2. Open to everyone.  A traditional museum offers
many barriers to the disabled, and especially the visually
disabled. Since a museum exists to “put exhibits on view,”
it   has very little information to offer the visually disabled.
Even  the  explanations  accompanying  exhibits  often
consist only of written words on panels.  On the other
hand, Japanese explanation becomes a barrier for people
from other countries. Barriers like these that tend to create
a distance between certain people and the exhibits in a
museum can also be overcome by digital technologies.

3.2.3. Open with respect to space and time.  The large
museum collection would require an enormous amount of
spaces  to  put  on  display  all  at  once,  making  this
impossible under the present circumstances.  Special
exhibits built around a common theme can be held for
limited periods. Once that time is past, the exhibits are no
longer available for viewing.  Moreover, an exhibition
cannot be seen by people who do not come to the
museum.  For people who cannot be in that place at the
time, this is yet another barrier.

In the Digital Museum concept, the collections can be
seen from anywhere, at any time.  Even after a special


exhibition has ended, the exhibited collections can still be
seen.  Moreover, comprehensive exhibitions can be put
combining the resources of other museums as well.  This
is just the distributed museum concept (See Section 3.5).
To overcome the limits of time and place is a part of the
aims of the Digital Museum.

3.3. Multimedia presentation

The Digital Museum is not only for looking with the
eyes.   Going  beyond  the  bounds  of  conventional
museums that put items “on view,” it offers the materials
as multimedia, for a wide range of senses including
hearing and touching.

For example, in the Digital Museum, information
terminals  will  be  located  in  various  places,  and
explanations will make use of multimedia, from video to
audio.  In addition to sight and sound, equipment for
creating replicas will be introduced to allow tactile
exhibitions.  Visitors will be able to touch them freely
without worrying about damaging the materials (Figure 1).
Furthermore, sensors and microchip embedded in the
replicas will make it possible for the exhibits themselves to
turn a replica into a simulation of the real thing.  For
example tapping on a plastic replica of a pottery vase will
cause it to respond with the same sound as the original.

These uses of multimedia in museum exhibits will not
only help ordinary visitors understand the exhibits, but
will open the door to people which various kinds of
disabilities that up to now have prevented them from
enjoying the benefit of museums.

Figure 1: Old pottery and its replica

3.4. Personalized museum

Personal Museum is an example of supplementing the
real with the virtual, in which information will be
personalized to meet the characteristics of the visitor.

In many cases  in the real world,  it is inefficient to
respond separately to individuals.  For example, if efforts
are made to match the expressions on museum panels to

the visitors as much as possible, we need to pay attention
to the following at the least: Differences in the level of
contents for general adults, for experts, and for school
children. The accessibility to people with weak eye-sight,
color blindness and other physical conditions. Languages
used for Japanese visitors and foreign visitors. It is clear
that,  while  a  wide  range  of  combinations  can  be
accommodated, museums would become places where real
materials could be found within a forest of panels.

In contrast, in the world of computers and information,
responding separately to individuals is not a big overhead.
If  visitors  input  information  about  their  own
characteristics into their PDAs when they first arrive, then
it     is possible to display text in accordance with those
attributes. The information can be displayed in larger fonts
if necessary, and it is possible to have the information
read out for visually impaired visitors. Moreover, it is
possible  to  identify  the  visitor,  and  change  the
commentary according to the order in which they are
viewing exhibits.  It should be possible for the museum
exhibits to recognize the visitors, and in principle provide
a different response for each individual.

3.5. Distributed museum

By connecting virtual museums , we can create  the
ultimate museum comprising the digital archives of all
museums throughout the world on the Internet.  This is
the concept of a distributed museum. On the other hand,
the POS approach of the commercial distribution network
states  that  it  is  better  to  input  at  the  place  where
information is generated, and a similar concept is likely to
be introduced into the field of  museum collections. For
example, whenever a piece of earthenware is found at an
excavation site, it is  always recorded in a ledger.  In
addition to this, if an input device such as a 3D scanner is
brought  in  to  digitize  each  piece,  the  creation  of  a
database  would  be  completed  there  and  then.
Reconstruction work could be carried out efficiently in a
virtual space using computers, later.

4. Digital Archive Technologies

Digital archive is just the core of Digital Museum,
because it is used for both collection preservation and
exhibition. The quality of digital archive would decide the
quality of Digital Museum.  In constructing digital
archives, there are many key digital technologies.  For
example, technologies for databases, huge storages, and
data representations are among them. In this section, we
focus  on  data  representation  technologies,  text
representations and semantic data format of museums.
Compared with other technologies, this is especially
important  because  insufficient  data  format  causes


important information of collections to lose, and will make
digital archives useless in the future.

4.1. Data format of digital archives

The basic data format of digital archives is still text.
Museum collection includes many writings, such as books,
leafs, and inscriptions. Also, every museum collection has
attributes represented by texts, such as its name, creators,
created date, and its interpretations.

Our museum locates in Japan, and preserves many
Asian collections.  In handling Asian contents on
computers, the main feature is that the character sets used
in  their texts are very large. For example, Japan, Korea,
and China use a common character set called “Kanji”, and
the total number of “Kanji” characters is said to be more
than 100,000.  On the other hands, compared with
European languages, “Kanji” presents two other features.
First, the forms, and also meanings, of characters had been
changing with time.  For example, in Japan, and also in
China, the standard forms of “Kanji” characters were
drastically simplified in these fifty years, so as to decrease
hand-writing efforts. Second, the character set is open, so
that   we can create a new “Kanji” characters. Since the
birth of “Kanji”, many characters have newly been created
and, conversely, many characters have almost died.

Conventional character codes of current industrial
standards and text processing mechanisms built upon the
codes are insufficient for these features. In Japan, most
computer systems support JIS ¹ code or its variations,
which contains less than 10,000 characters. Als o, it can
represent only modern forms of “Kanji” characters.
However, museum collections require old forms of
characters because, for example, names of materials were
represented in the old characters originally. On account of
these reasons, current comp utes cannot show even
original names of collections.

For this reason, ideal text processing mechanisms for
museums should satisfy the following requirements. First,
we  should  provide  open  and  large  character  sets.
Seconds, because the large character set will contains
many different forms of the same characters, so that we
need  a  character  dictionaries  storing  the  relationship
among the characters.  Third, we need not only “Kanji”
text  processing,  but  also  more  general  multilingual
processing environment.

To accomplish these requirements, we have started a
project to develop an ideal text processing mechanism
called TRON Multilingual Processing Environment (TRON
MPE) [11].  It is a total architecture and consists of
character  codes  (TRON  code),  text  processing
mechanisms,   requirements   for   underlying   OS

¹ JIS is an abbreviation of Japan Industrial Standards.

specifications (BTRON3 specification), and regulation
mechanism to add/delete characters from the TRON code.
In present, the TRON MPE supports more than 130,000
characters of many languages all over the world, while its
potential capacity is more than 1,000,000 characters
(Figure 2).

4.2. Museum TAD

Digital data format of the Digital Museum is required to
have diverse attribute description capability while at the
same time being general, in a tradeoff relationship.

For example, if storing an item of earthenware in the
digital archive, related data may include 3D shape data,
texture,  soil  composition  analysis  data,  and  written
commentary, each of which has its own relationships.
Furthermore,  data  indicating  the  excavation  site  from
which the earthenware was found, and the state it was in,
are required. For ancient documents, it might be necessary
to add information of the pronunciation of the time. In this
way, it becomes necessary to prepare  various types of
diverse data formats for each of multiple genres.

On the other hand, to investigate how the ceramic ware

Figure 2: TRON Multilingual Processing Environment

Figure 3: Top page of the Tokyo University Digital
Museum site (http://www.um.u-tokyo.ac.jp/)


affected those of later years, and how they affected other
items from other areas, the data format of the digital
archives should not be diverse for each genre, but be
standardized. In addition, for our distributed museum
concept, this standardization is strongly required. This
standardization must define properly the data structure
(syntax)  and its meaning (semantics) so that the computer
can understand and process the data.  Without this
feature, it is impossible to carry out an integrated search
extending across multiple museum databases.

To answer this need, we are developing an attribute
description data format for the museum that we refer to as
Museum TAD². The TRON code referred in Section 4.1 is
defined in this data format framework. In the Museum
TAD format, to accomplish the two requirements of
diversity and generality, we have adopted an object-
oriented  language  called  PCO (Portable Comp ound
Object) [13]. By using the object-oriented framework, we
can create diverse data formats efficiently by defining
subclasses from the base class. On the other hand, we
can accomplish generality by using its inheritance
mechanisms.  In the future, if the Museum TAD will be
succeeded, we can realize a distributed museum in which
museums in the world are linked with one another.

5. Digital Exhibition Technologies

5.1. Museum as information provider

This  section  describes  exhibition  technologies  of
Digital Museum.  Digital Museum incorporates with not
only virtual galleries but also real galleries. As for digital
virtual exhibitions, we have built a virtual museum upon
WWW system on the Internet (Figure 3).  Further, we
have build a new type of virtual museums consisting of a
cooperative  virtual  environment  called  as  MMMUD
(Multi-Media  Multi-User  Dungeon).   As  for  real
exhibitions, we have proposed several augmented-reality
technologies to enhance real exhibitions.

5.2. Virtual exhibition (MMMUD)

MMMUD (Multi-Media Multi-User Dungeon) system
aims to build virtual museums [8,9,10]. Enormous numbers
of academic materials of museums are digitized and stored
as digital archive, and they are exhibited in the MMMUD
virtual museums.  The virtual environment of the
MMMUD is managed by server systems. In order to join
with the virtual environment, users run a MMMUD
browser on their terminal computers and the browsers are
connected to the server system via network. When a

² TAD is an abbreviation for TRON Application Data-bus,
and is the name of a data format standardized across
applications of TRON - the computer framework studied
and developed by us. 

browser is connected to the server system, an agent of the
user in the virtual environment, called an avatar, is created.
The MMMUD browser renders images of the virtual
environment from the view of its avatar. Users can control
their avatars and can explore the virtual environment.

Features  of  exhibitions  in  the  MMMUD  virtual
museums are as follows. First, different from the real world,
we can acquire as large exhibition spaces as we want to
use. Museums collect many academic materials, however,
we can see only a part of the materials due to the limited
exhibition  spaces.  On the other hand, in the virtual
museums, we can see many academic materials that cannot
be shown in the real museums . This is because the virtual
environment can provide almost infinite exhibition spaces.
Another feature is that the virtual museums are used as
not only database  browser of museum’s collections but
also used as communication spaces for users.  Recently,
there are many web-based virtual museums , in which we
can see various collections of the museum, but we cannot
talk about the exhibitions with others.  On the contrary,
the MMMUD allows users to  communicate with each
other. The MMMUD browsers render not only images of
the rooms and exhibits in the virtual environment but also
images of other avatars.  You can see motions of other
avatars, and which exhibits other users are interested in.
This information is important for users to decide which
exhibit to see next.  The MMMUD system also supports
other types of communications among visitors with real-
time  voice  chatting  and  multi-user  tools.  With  these
mechanisms, you can be explained about exhibits by other
visitors, and can talk about the exhibit with them.

The MMMUD virtual museum displays collections in
the  same  way  as  real  museums.  Users  can  view
explanations of materials in front of their avatars and
extract various multimedia data by using the following
tools.

Explanation tool: Explanation tool is a tool for reading
explanation texts, which will be displayed as hypertext
documents  containing  links  to  other  texts  or  other
collections. Moreover, this tool can read the explanation
text   by using speech sound (Figure 5).

Magnifying glass tool: Usually, digital archives contain
much higher resolution images than the resolution of
usual computer displays. Thus, to see image data in the
digital archive in its full resolution, we provide a virtual
tool to magnify the image data on our display.

Rotation tool: Rotation tool is a tool to observe 3D
geometric data created by 3D scanners. By using this tool,
users can rotate and magnify materials represented in the
3D geometric data (Figure 7).


Figure 4: Walking in the M³UD virtual gallery         Figure 5: Selecting an 
object, then applying a tool

Figure 6: Explanation tool                Figure 7: Video avatar with rotation 
tool


Special tool to visualize the distribution of seismic
centers: This tool is a very special tool to visualize the
spatial, time, and scale distributions of seismic centers. For
instance, this tool provides a command to change time
scales.  This  can  enable  users  to  view  the  spatial
distribution of seismic centers of earthquakes occurred
during any period. In the same way as the rotation tool,
this can rotate and magnify the 3D maps of seismic centers.

Cooperation tool: Cooperation tool is a tool to observe
other user's behavior using tools. When users uses the
cooperation tool, they can see the observed users’
screens. The observing user’s screen will change in real-
time according to the actions of the observed users. The
observing and observed users can talk with each other
while they use the same tool. This mechanism supports
users to exchange information or to discuss about
materials.

In real museums, visitors can hear explanation of
materials by curators and participate museum guide tours.

The MMMUD virtual museum can also provide this
function, called video guide tour function. This function
shows a special avatar in the form of human video images.
This special avatar gives users guidance and explanation
of museum exhibits. This special avatar, called video avatar,
has a function to move in the virtual environment and,
moreover, other usual users participating the video guide
tour follow the video avatar automatically [10].

5.3. Real exhibition (augmented-reality)

This section shows several  augmented-reality (AR)
museum exhibition systems [12].

5.3.1.  PDMA.   PDMA  (Personal  Digital  Museum
Assistant) is an information system in which a PDA
screen displays explanatory information by holding the
PDA over exhibition objects (Figure 8). In this system, an
IrDA transmitter is set nearby an exhibit object that always
sends the object ID. The PDA contains an IrDA receiver
and shows information according to the received ID.
Using PDMA, users can select information presentation


formats according to users’ needs. For example, users can
select normal displays, large character displays for the
elders and the low vision, easy information especially for
kids, and English display for foreigners.

IrDA receiver

IrDA transmitter

5.3.3. Point-it.  Point-it is a novel museum information
system using laser-pointing method and speech sound
output. Seeing exhibition, visitors bring laser pointers and
PDAs with speech output function (Figure 10). Walking in
a gallery, they approach to a display case, and then the
PDA firstly speak overall explanation of the exhibit
automatically.  When they want to know more precise
information about each object, they only have to point its
title plate by their laser pointers. We have designed this
system by simulating an expositor always accompanying
beside vis itors.  When they are approaching to a new
display corner, the expositor talks about the theme of the
corner. They standing at the corner, visitors may ask the
expositor by pointing their fingers, “What’s that?” Then,
he/she gives more precise information for each object.

Infrared light


Figure8: Personal Digital Museum Assistant

Laser pointer


5.3.2. Museum AR information system.  Museum AR
information system gives visitors exhibition information
overlaid  upon  objects  through  a  see-through  HMD
equipped with a small  CCD camera that captures object
IDs. This system is a combination of the bar code method
and the overlaid display using an HMD.  This system
enables visitors to obtain overlaid information by only
turning their eyes onto the objects that they are interested
in (Figure 9).

Laser beam

Light Senso r

PDA


Bar code 

Video 
Camera 


HM D

Caption plate equipped
with light sensor

Figure 10: Point-it

Light sensor unit


Figure 9: Museum AR Information System

5.3.4. Real-world bookmarking. In the museum, visitors
often take memos about explanations of displayed objects.
In case of conventional WWW browsers, this activity is
strongly supported by the bookmarking function. Thus,
we propose Real-World Bookmarking System that enables
museum visitors to store pointers of exhibition objects for
latter references through the Internet.

Visitors bring an RFID card that conveys visitor’s
information (Figure 11-(1)). An input device such as a
switch and an RFID reader are put in front of exhibition
objects (Figure 11-(2)).  When they want to store their
information, they first put their RFID card on the reader to
let   the system recognize the visitors’ IDs, then put a
bookmarking button to record the pair data of a visitor ID
and object ID (Figure 11-(3)).  By the operation, the


museum bookmark server receives and stores the data for
further queries from their homes via the Internet. In our
current pilot implementation, a personal computer is used
for the unit working as a bookmarking switch and an RFID
card reader controller. The PC shows thumbnail images of
objects displayed in the display case, and visitors can
select which objects they record as bookmarks (Figure 11-
(4)).

(1) Visitors information card     (2) Card I/F unit

(3) A visitor bookmarking     (4) Sample screen in

bookmarking
Figure        11: Real-World Bookmarking

6. Conclusion

This paper briefly introduces the basic concept and key
technologies of Tokyo University Digital Museum.  The
main goal of our activity is to propose new forms of
museums  of  the  future  in  which  digital  technologies
support all kinds of museum activities such as gathering,
preserving, researching, exhibiting, and educating about
collections. Further,  this paper has  reported our novel
digital technologies for the digital museum such as media
and  human  interface  technologies  for  new  exhibition
styles  and  data  processing  technologies  for  digital
archiving of cultural or historical materials.

References

[1]  K. Sakamura: “TRON and Digital Museum”, In Proc.
13th TRON Project International Symposium, IEEE
CS Press, pp. 2-13 (1996).

[2] K. Sakamura ed., “Digital Museum”, The University
Museum, The University Tokyo, 1996.

[3] K.  Sakamura  and  H.  Suzuki  ed.,  “Virtual
Architecture”,  The  University  Museum,  The
University Tokyo, 1997.

[4]  K.  Sakamura  ed.,  “Open  Academia:  The  120th
Anniversary  of  the  University  of  Tokyo”,  The
University of Tokyo, 1997.

[5]  K. Sakamura ed., “Science of Life ”, The University of
Tokyo, 1998.

[6]  K. Sakamura and S. Hasumi ed., “From behind the
Camera:  A  New  Look  at  the  World  of  Director
Yasujiro Ozu Based on Private Materials of the Late
Yuharu  Atsuta”,  The  University  Museum,  The
University of Tokyo, 1998.

[7]  K.  Sakamura  ed.,  “Digital  Museum  2000”,  The
University Museum, The University of Toky o, 2000.

[8]  T. Usaka, et. al., “A Multimedia MUD System for the
Digital  Museum”,  In  Proc.  3rd  Asia  Pacific
Computer Human Interaction, IEEE CS Press, pp. 32-
37 (1998).

[9]  S. Yura, et. al., “Design and Implementation of the
Browser for the Multimedia Multi-User Dungeon of
the Digital Museum”, In  Proc. 3rd Asia Pacific
Computer Human Interaction, IEEE CS Press, pp. 44-
49, (1998).

[10] S. Yura, T. Usaka, and K. Sakamura. “Video Avatar:
Embedded  Video  for  Collaborative  Virtual
Environment”,  In  Proc.  IEEE  International
Conference on Multimedia Computing and Systems
'99,                             IEEE CS Press, (1999).

[11] N. Koshizuka, et. al., “100,000 Chinese Characters Set
‘GT Mincho’ and its Processing Environment as a
Global  Communications  Infrastructure”,  In  Proc.
International    Conference    of    Computer
Communications '99, (Sept. 1999).

[12] N.  Koshizuka,  et.  al.,  “HyperGallery:  A  Museum
Information  Space  Integrating  Real  and  Virtual
Galleries  for  Digital  Museums”,  In  Proc.  8th
Workshop  on  Interactive  Systems  and  Software,
Japan  So ciety for Software Science and Technology,
2000, in Japanese, to appear.

[13] K. Kuramitsu and K. Sakamura: “PCO: EC Content
Description   Language   Supporting   Distributed
Schemas across the Internet”, Transactions of IPSJ,
Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 110-122, 2000, in Japanese.

