Lepouras, G., Charitos, D., Vassilakis, C., Charisi, A., Halatsi, L. (2001). 
“Building a VR museum in a
museum”, in Richir, S., Richard, P., Taravel, B. (eds.), Proc. 2001 VRIC Laval 
Virtual International
Conference, 16-18 May 2001, Laval, France, ISBN: 5343545

VRIC,Virtual Reality International Conference, Laval Virtual 2001, May 16-18

Building a VR-Museum in a Museum

George Lepouras, Dimitrios Charitos, Costas Vassilakis, Anna Charissi, Leda 
Halatsi
Human-Computer Interaction and Virtual Reality Research Group, Department of 
Informatics,

University of Athens, Ktiria Pliroforikis, Panepistimioupolis, Ilisia, Athens 
15771, Greece, vr-lab@di.uoa.gr

Keywords: Virtual Reality, virtual museum, exhibit digitisation, virtual 
architecture

Abstract: Past years have seen the exploitation of multimedia techniques and 
lately the introduction of virtual
reality methods to create new forms of presentation for museums' exhibitions. 
Virtual Reality can offer a num-
ber of advantages to museums, offering a way to overcome some common problems 
like the lack of space or the
need of visitors to interact with the exhibits. A broad categorisation of 
virtual museums reveals that they vary
from fully immersive cave systems to simple multimedia presentations. In our 
approach to develop a virtual
reality museum we have designed a virtual environment (VE) where guests can 
visit a total of ten different mu-
seums. The processes of digitisation, architectural design and exhibit 
presentation are outlined and points of
particular importance are explained. Exhibits from the real world museums have 
been digitised and integrated
in  the VE. The system has been implemented in two versions: one fully 
immersive and one with a stereo display.


1  Introduction

Museums, in general, host exhibitions in order to
disseminate their message to the public. Within the
museum's environment the form of exhibited ob-
jects' manifests the museum's message. Museum
exhibitions and individual objects provide two
kinds of information: scientific and cultural. Ex-
perience has shown that this information can be
communicated more effectively by complementing
plain exhibit presentation with additional media
and by targeting other senses too [1, 2]. Research
effort has been put on exploiting technological
advancements to the museums' benefit. The term
Virtual Museum was coined by Tsichritzis and
Gibbs in their 1991 paper [3] where they describe
the concept of a virtual museum and the technolo-
gies needed to realise it.

In an earlier paper [4], we addressed the general
issues concerning the development of a Virtual
Museum, accessible either through the Web or
locally. The present paper focuses on the devel-
opment of a locally executed virtual reality envi-
ronment to be offered to visitors of the N. P.

1

Foundation Museum of Cycladic Art . This work

is accomplished in the framework of the "Virtual

2

Museums" project . Ten museums participate in

this project and provide 2D and 3D content to be
digitised and included within the virtual museum.
The first section of the paper discusses the possi-
ble advantages from incorporating a Virtual Mu-
seum presentation within the context of a real mu-
seum. The second section attempts to broadly
categorise cases of virtual museums that have been
implemented within real-world museums. Finally,
the third section presents our approach to design-
ing and implementing the locally executed Virtual
Reality Museum.

Recent years have witnessed the introduction of
new forms of presentation in museums' exhibi-
tions. Multimedia techniques have been widely
used for enhancing users' experience and attracting
more visitors to museums, as well as for providing
a new means for communicating their content and
consequently information. Nowadays, most mod-
ern museums offer multimedia info-kiosks, where
visitors can get information regarding the mu-
seum's collections, special exhibitions, and other
cultural activities. In some cases there is an option
for a multimedia tour of the museum, where the
visitor may 'preview' the museum content. 3D
graphics and simulation technologies also offers


1 The museum’s web address is http://www.cycladic-
m.gr/

2 The “Virtual Museums” project is sponsored by the
Greek General Secretariat of Research and Tech-
nology within the EPET II Framework.


the possibility of reconstructing lost or partially
preserved objects and enabling visitors to experi-
ence an approximation of the original artefact (that
being an ancient statue, a dinosaur or even a lost
city). Additionally, the emergence of the World
Wide Web provided the infrastructure for making
museums available to a global level, since an on-
line exhibition is accessible from almost anywhere
in the world at any time.

2  The need for a VR system within
the museum environment

Multimedia, 3D graphics and virtual reality (VR)
technologies encourage the adoption of more so-
phisticated interactive techniques, for the digital
presentation of museum content. It is however
understood that a virtual museum is not necessar-
ily limited into being a simulation of a real, exist-
ing museum. Although, these technologies have
mostly been used for creating an enhanced, on-line
version of an original museum, they can also be
utilised for augmenting the visitor's experience
within the real museum environment.

To this end, there are a number of reasons, which
justify the installation of a virtual environment
(VE) system within a museum:

Lack of space: Most museums display a fraction
of the exhibits that they own, since exhibition
space is always limited. Some objects may be too
fragile or valuable to be exhibited. Stored objects
can be effectively displayed by means of a VR
presentation within the museum.

Vivid presentation: Although a simple multime-
dia presentation can also be used for displaying
stored content, a VE system affords the museum
visitor a more vivid and realistic experience. Ex-
hibits can be interactively observed from different
viewpoints or even manipulated. Haptic feedback
technology may also enable visitors to touch and
feel valuable objects, or may let people with vision
problems sense an exhibit. It has to be stressed
however, that the nature and individual character-
istics of an exhibit (painting, photography, 3D
object, etc) largely dictate the ideal technology
that should be used for displaying it in a digital
form.

Virtual Heritage visualisation: a VE system af-
fords visitors the possibility to view a simulation
of important objects, buildings or environments,
which have been constructed at a much earlier
point in time; these environments may either:

•  no longer exist today

•  be somehow damaged and in need of recon-
struction or

•  can not be easily experienced, either because
they exist at a remote site or because their
condition does not allow for their interior to
be navigated.

Visualization of hazardous sites: a VE system is
a secure way of providing the experience of visit-
ing an environment, which may be too difficult or
too dangerous to physically visit (e.g. inside a vol-
cano or on the mountains of Mars).

Mobile exhibition: the digitised content of a mu-
seum may be experienced in a realistic manner via
a mobile VE system, which can be easily trans-
ported to any exhibition site or remote location.
This fact may give a chance to a wider audience to
view important exhibitions without having to
travel far.

Navigational aid: Some museums are quite vast
and, in some cases, visitors may only be interested
in certain exhibits, which exist at certain points
within the museum. Instead of physically travers-
ing the distances amongst these objects, visitors
may view the desired exhibits from within the VR-
equipped system. This is particularly important for
visitors with accessibility problems. Aiding the
exhibition design process: a VE system may be
used:

•  during the iterative design process of a certain
exhibition environment, as a means of evaluat-
ing  the design, or

•  after the completion of the design, as a means
of communicating the result.

3  Overview of existing Virtual Mu-
seum systems

Up to this day, a number of museums have
adopted VR techniques, mainly for offering an
enhanced presentation to the visitor. In this section
an overview and a broad categorisation of these
systems along with supporting technologies is
presented. The term VR is by definition used for
describing an interactive 3D graphics system.
However a quick review of several Virtual Muse-
ums, implemented so far, reveals that this term is
also being used for describing an electronic mu-
seum, the content of which has been partly digi-
tised and presented with the help of hypermedia or
3D graphics technologies.

An overview of a large number of “Virtual” Mu-
seums shows that the technologies employed, vary
widely from fully immersive cave systems to sim-
ple multimedia presentations. An attempt to cate-
gorise these systems, according to the quality of
the afforded experience (degree of immersion,
type and resolution of display, etc.) is presented
below:

High End Systems: The most compelling direct
experience is afforded by fully-immersive or pro-
jection-based VE systems. These systems use cut-
ting-edge technology and their cost is very high,
therefore the number of such installations world-
wide is limited. Examples of such systems are: the
Cave (e.g. Foundation of Hellenic World, Athens)


[5], fully-immersive systems that utilise HMDs for
display and 3D interaction and tracking devices
for navigation and interaction (e.g. Char Davies’
art installations: “Osmose” and “Ephemere”) [6,
7]. Finally, the Dome-projection system used at
the Hayden Planetarium (visualization of space via
a three-dimensional map on a dome) could be also
considered as belonging to this category [8].

Mid-Range Systems: These systems can be found
installed locally in museums due to their relatively
high cost. However, they are more affordable and
portable and thus appear to be a more effective
solution as a display or evaluation tool. These are
mainly desktop VR systems, using a standard
high-resolution or stereo monitor and in some
cases shutter glasses. Interaction and navigation
within the virtual environment occurs by means of
trackballs, joysticks or 3D input devices (e.g. To-
kyo National Museum [9], The Getty Museum
[10]).

Lower End Systems: The majority of Virtual
Museums can be accessed via the Internet by eve-
ryone who owns a low cost PC. These could either
be systems for interactively viewing individual 3D
objects (VRML based, Cult3D, etc.), pseudo-3D
systems for displaying interactively controlled
panoramic views (IPIX, QTVR) or mechanisms
for viewing static stereo images of 3d models. The
most common approach is the use of multimedia
for presenting information about the museum’s
exhibits, but this cannot be considered a virtual
reality system In any case. Typical examples of
these systems can be found at the web site of the
Tower of Pisa [11], the museum of Louvre [12]
and the Hermitage Museum [13].

4.    The design of the virtual mu-
seum

3.1  Museums' requirement analysis

The design of the virtual museum followed a task
analysis methodology; specifically that proposed
by Parent [14]. For each of the 10 museums a pro-
file of its users was drawn, where attributes such
as their language and their profession (i.e. student,
researcher, etc.) were recorded. Additionally, an
outline  of  the  museums  characteristics  was
sketched describing the museum's aim, special
needs, existing infrastructure, etc. Finally a task
analysis profile was composed, which included
issues such as the rationale for the virtual envi-
ronment, the activities it would support and the
requirements for storage and retrieval. Conse-
quently, design requirements for participants and
for the target application were identified. These
requirements determined the way in which content
organisation and categorisation took place and

generally how the creative phase of the design
evolved.

3.2  Exhibit digitisation

Depending on the exhibit and the requirements set,
a number of techniques were used for the exhibits'
digitisation and the creation of 2D and 3D objects.
The creation of 3D objects followed one these
three techniques:

•  3D photography

•  3D scanning

•  3D modelling

3D photography was the easier and most straight-
forward of the three methods. The object was first
captured by the camera as a set of photographs,
which were then imported in a proprietary soft-
ware and stitched together. Finally a three dimen-
sional description of the object including the im-
ages mapped on its surfaces was deducted and
exported in a format compatible with VR software.
This method was not the best in terms of quality,
but was more convenient for capturing objects
when 3D scanning techniques could not be used
(due to their surface qualities or size) or were dif-
ficult to model.

3D scanning was used in most objects where qual-
ity and detail of the representation was essential
and where their surface properties allowed for
laser scanning. For example, almost all of the an-
cient objects were scanned via this method, since
the need for a precise reproduction of the original
artefact could not be fulfilled by the other two
methods.

Finally, when the original object mainly com-
prised of geometrical forms, it was feasible to pro-
duce a precise 3D representation by means of ex-
isting 3D modelling tools (as in the case of a tele-
scope or a machine). These methods allowed for
creating hierarchical models, which afford more
flexible manipulation of individual smaller com-
ponents that the object comprised of. For example,
a model of a machine may help a participant visu-
alise the way that it works and afford certain
modifications on its operation.

In parallel with the digitisation of exhibits the ar-
chitectural design of the virtual museum was car-
ried out.

3.3  4.3   Architectural design

The museum message is communicated by an exhi-
bition to individual participants through museum
exhibits. Messages may be directly communicated
via the content of exhibits but they are also influ-
enced by:

•  the way that exhibits are individually posi-
tioned

•  the relation of each exhibit to the general or-
ganisation of the exhibition.


Therefore, the spatial organisation of exhibits
within the virtual museum has a significant effect
on the message communicated to participants via
this exhibition.

It can be suggested that environmental characteris-
tics of the virtual museum, such as lighting, posi-
tioning and orientation of exhibits and physical
structure of exhibition spaces, may determine the
behaviour of museum visitors when navigating or
viewing an exhibition within a museum and their
will to view certain exhibits [15]. It is therefore
understood that the environmental design of the
museum significantly affects the message commu-
nicated to visitors as well as their behaviour within
the virtual museum and consequently the degree to
which target and user requirements are accommo-
dated.

All aspects of the virtual museum experience have
been organised so as to add to the participant’s
knowledge acquisition and entertainment. It has to
be stressed, however, that the design of the “vir-
tual” exhibitions in the ten museums participating
in this project mainly focuses on the educational
aspect of the museum experience, rather than the
aesthetic one.

Additionally, emphasis has been given on the
functionality of the environment regarding user
navigation and content presentation. The design of
space within the museum has attempted to aid the
participant into navigating within the VE, while
maintaining a sense of orientation provided by
appropriately designed environmental information.
The utilisation of architectural knowledge has
proved invaluable in enhancing the participant’s
environmental knowledge and in directing partici-
pant attention towards certain points or messages
within the exhibition space.

Regarding the level of realism that characterises
the environmental elements of the virtual museum,
this paper argues that while the use of realistic
metaphorical representations may allow for trans-
fer   of knowledge and skills involved in everyday
activities, the use of realistic environmental ele-
ments limits the potential of VEs for creating
novel forms, environments and situations. There-
fore, the designed museum maintains certain ge-
neric environmental elements of the real world and
attempts to investigate non-realistic forms and
elements which are thought to improve the effec-
tiveness and impact of the exhibition. In certain
cases, however, a simplified simulation of a realis-
tic setting has been considered as a more appropri-
ate approach and has been adopted accordingly
(e.g., the museum of Zoology).

A number of other issues, which have dictated the
design of environmental elements within the virtual
museum and which relate to the inherent character-
istics of space in virtual environments [15], are re-
ferred to here:

•  Space in a VE may be discontinuous A partici-
pant can teleport from one position within a VE
to a remote position within the same VE when
traversing between these two positions is not
considered essential for the needs of the par-
ticular application. For example, traversing
within certain paths in the museum environ-
ment is considered essential for the purpose of
enhancing the generation of cognitive maps of
this environment by participants. In the mean-
time, movement within these paths is aided by
an automatic escalator-like function which rids
participants of the effort to manoeuvre via a
narrow longitudinal space.

•  Physical laws do not necessarily apply to VEs.
The law of gravity is considered limiting and
not essential for dictating navigation of partici-
pants within the virtual museum. Indeed the
lack of gravity and consequent fly-through na-
vigation mode is seen as more appropriate for a
VE that expands in three dimensions. On the
contrary, the materiality of most objects is
stressed by the use of collision detection on
them. This property is considered essential for
the purpose of clearly bounding and thus defin-
ing the museum environment and making the
overall experience more effective and consis-
tent.

•  Since gravity has not been implemented, the
sense of vertical/horizontal in this VE depends
on environmental cues, which may enhance the
sense of orientation [16]. Such cues have been
carefully integrated in the environmental de-
sign (red horizon, textual signs, etc.)

Figure 1: View of the overall VR museums' com-
plex

The 10 museums that the designed VE consists of,
have been organised into 4 categories according to
their content:

•  Human-centred  museums  (Anthropology,
Forensic Science, Hygiene)

•  Historical/archaeological  museums  (Gou-
ladris Museum of Cycladic Art, Archaeologi-
cal Museum of the Department of Philosophy

- University of Athens, Museum of History of
the Athens University)


•  Museums of the Earth (Mineralogy, Geology)

•  Museums of the Flora and Fauna (Botanical,
Zoology)

The spatial design of the museum has been dic-
tated by these categories as well as categorisation
of exhibits within each individual museum accord-
ing to the requirements provided by museum or-
ganisers as well as their selection of particular
exhibits for display. The spatial organisation of
each exhibition is also determined by the way ac-
tivities are organised within each museum and this
fact depends on the aim and objectives of each
individual exhibition.

Several factors determine the form of each spatial
entity within the museum :

•  The nature, size, and number of exhibits it
includes.

•  The specific needs for each exhibit category.

•  The way that the museum spaces are inter-
connected with the overall museum complex
and its sub-domains.

•  The 3D navigation technique used in the VE.

•  The method of viewing a set of exhibits.

navigating participant to each of the museums. As
participants look up towards the museum complex
from within the entrance hall, which has a semi-
transparent top surface, they are able to view the
structure of the whole museum and be aware of
what to expect as they make their way into this
structure.

Navigation between the entrance halls and foyer is
performed via paths, which have a longitudinal cy-
lindrical shape and a square section. Repetitive
frame-objects are positioned along these paths for
enhancing the sense of movement and providing a
feedback on the distance traversed while moving
along the path [17].

Figure 3: View of museum complex from within
the entrance hall


Figure 2: A museum foyer

The overall museum complex expands in three
dimensions, the depth of the hierarchical structure
of the complex corresponding to the dimension of
“height”. The structure of the museum mainly
comprises of three different types of foyer, which
accommodate the distribution of movement within
the museum complex:

1. entrance hall

2. museum-category foyer and

3. museum foyer.

The participant enters the overall museum complex
at a hall, which has a centralised form. Since the
application is initially designed for a limited num-
ber  of participants (1-2) this hall as well as all foyer
spaces are not very large but simply serve as a
spaces for distributing movement towards each of
the 4 categories of museums. Each category corre-
sponds to a foyer, which further distributes the

The use of teleportation has been adopted at
“higher” levels of the museum structure, for reduc-
ing movement and facilitating navigation within the
VE. This is also considered essential for affording
the inclusion of more exhibition halls in the future,
without the necessity of significantly changing the
spatial design of each museum.

Figure 4: View from a transitional space towards
path exhibition halls


Figure 5: View along a path exhibition hall

At the individual museum level, participants enter
each museum’s foyer and may navigate to a number
of transitional spaces from where they have a
choice of paths or halls to follow in order to view
parts of the exhibition. Each path or hall corre-
sponds to a group of exhibits. At the end of these
paths and halls there is a portal which teleports par-
ticipants back to the transitional space where they
can make their next navigational decision through
the museum content.

3.4  Exhibit presentation

The museum message is communicated via the ex-
hibition and its exhibits to individual museum visi-
tors. It is understood that this message is perceived
by visitors in a subjective manner, according to
their interests, knowledge and imagination. A num-
ber of issues regarding the presentation of exhibits
may have an impact on messages communicated to
museum's visitors:

•  the content of each individual exhibit,

•  the manner in which the exhibit captures the
visitor's attention,

•  the position of the exhibit within the exhibi-
tion.

For example, one can present a set of ancient tools
by concentrating on the tools' usage (religious,
cooking, hunting, etc.), on the manufacturing pro-
cedure, on the medium they have been constructed
from (clay, stone, metal), on the chronological era
they belong, etc. Depending on the message that
we want to send to the visitors, we will present the
exhibits in a different manner. In the previous ex-
ample, we can group together tools with the same
usage, to focus on this characteristic, we can put
spotlights or we can isolate certain exhibits to
draw attention on them. Adding explanations, in
the form of text or narration can enhance the user's
experience and provide necessary informational
cues.

Depending on the museum's nature/characteristics
different approaches have been explored in pre-

senting exhibits. In some cases presentation may
have attempted to resemble real world museums,
in a sense that a neutral spatial context is provided
wherein significant objects are exhibited. How-
ever, visitors are able to perform tasks that they
would not be able to carry out in the real museum.
They can move or rotate objects in order to inspect
them. In some cases we have to exploit virtual
reality technology in order to construct an interac-
tively experienced diorama for presenting the
original exhibits more vividly.

Museums such as the Human-Centred ones or the
museums of the Flora and Fauna contain exhibits
that are better presented in an environment that
looks like their natural surroundings. For example,
one of the exhibits of the zoology museum was a
penguin.

Figure 6: Photograph of a penguin model

In the original exhibition the penguin was pre-
sented as one object rather than an animal in its
natural surroundings. The visitor had to visualise
(using knowledge acquired from other sources, i.e.
documentaries, school books, museum guides) the
penguin living in its natural environment. This
limitation of the real world museum could be
overcome in the virtual reality museum by creat-
ing  a diorama. In this exhibition the visitor enters a
hall where the penguin is presented on an iceberg.
The visitor can view the penguin, while the sound
of waves splashing against the iceberg is heard.


Since the requirements differ among the ten muse-
ums, a number of different versions of the system
have been created. These versions differ in terms
of the peripherals supported:

•  In the lower-end desktop version of the sys-
tem, a monitor accompanied by a pair of
shutter glasses are used as devices providing
stereo display and a Magellan Space Mouse
is used as a 6-DOF input device. This version
is expected to be installed in museums, where
peripherals have to be able to withstand fre-
quent, everyday use by visitors.

•  In the high-end version, users wear a Head
Mounted Display and a Cyberglove, mounted
with trackers, which monitor their move-
ments/gestures. This is a version intended for
researchers, since these peripherals are more
fragile and frequent, not careful use can eas-
ily damage them.


Figure 7: Diorama reproduction of the penguin
model

Although in the current version of the virtual envi-
ronment visitors cannot really interact with the
penguin, as they would with a real world animal,
the experience is yet more vivid than the one af-
forded by the original exhibition.

3.5  System implementation

The implementation phase of the virtual environ-
ment progressed in parallel for some time with the
design and construction of the architectural aspect
and the digitisation of the exhibits. Once the lay-
out of a museum's hall or foyer was sketched, the
model was constructed by means of 3D modelling
techniques and iterative design was applied till the
environment matched the requirements. Conse-
quently exhibits were added to the rooms and
presentation modifications took place. Finally,
behaviours and actions were programmed for sup-
porting :

•   appropriate navigation modes within the
VE

•   affording certain modes of interactive ma-
nipulation of exhibits.

To aid the process of manipulating the objects and
their various versions (low, medium or high reso-
lution, 2d or 3d) a database was created where all
museum resources were stored.

4  Concluding remarks

New technology offers a great opportunity for
museums to make their exhibitions available to
more people in ways that was not feasible before.
Although a virtual exhibition cannot replace or
diminish the value of experiencing the original
exhibits, there are cases where it can enhance the
visitors' experience and draw new guests to muse-
ums.

In our approach ten museums with exhibits that
vary from archaeological to geological and from
hygiene to forensic have been combined within the
context of a virtual environment. Such a system
offers the visitor the possibility to view a selection
of each museum's collections without having to
travel. It is important to stress the significance of
using a VE system as a means of exhibiting the
content of a museum in another remote exhibition
space, since it may afford a larger number of peo-
ple the possibility of experiencing important exhi-
bitions without having to travel far and may also
lead to important collaborations amongst museums
worldwide and consequently to enhancing the
communication of knowledge and culture interna-
tionally.

While designing and implementing such a system,
a great effort should be put on the spatial aspect of
the VE, since this has a significant impact on the
message communicated to visitors and on their
behaviour within the VE.

Finally, we should emphasize the significance of
virtual reality techniques in helping museums'
guests visualise exhibits in a manner that is not
possible in a real museum.

We are currently investigating different methods
for presenting exhibits to virtual museum guests.
In particular, we are looking into creating fully
interactive dioramas, where exhibits will have


self-awareness and guests will be able to interact
with them.

5  Acknowledgements

Special thanks to Ms A. Katifori for her efforts
during the development of the VE and to Mr D.
Georgakis for his work in exhibit digitisation

6  References

[1] Wickens, C., Sandry, D., Vidulich, M., "Com-
patibility and Resource Competition between Mo-
dalities of Input, Central Processing and Output",
Human Factors, 25(2), pages 227-248, 1983.

[2] Burdea, G., Richard P., Coiffet P., "Multimodal
Virtual Reality: Input-Output Devices, System In-
tegration, and Human Factors", International
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 1996 v.8
n.1 p.5-24

[3] Tsichritzis, D., Gibbs, S., "Virtual Museums
and Virtual Realities", Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Hypermedia and Interactivity
in Museums, Pittsburgh, 1991.

[4] Charitos D., Lepouras, G., Vassilakis, C., Kati-
fori, V., Halatsi, L., (2000), "A Method for Design-
ing and Implementing Virtual Museums", UK VR-
SIG 2000, Proceedings of the seventh UK VR-SIG
Conference, Glasgow.

[5] The Foundation of the Hellenic World presents
a virtual reconstruction of ancient Miletus. For
more    information:    http://www.ime.gr
http://www.sgi.com/features/1999/oct/hellenic/
index.html

[6] Museum of Contemporary Art, Montreal, Can-
ada: An immersive interactive virtual reality envi-
ronment installation (Osmose) with 3d computer
graphics and interactive 3d sound. For more in-
formation:  http://www.immersence.com/  im-
mersence_home.htm

[7] The National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa:
Immersive virtual reality exhibition of an artist.
More information at: http://www.sgi.com/ fea-
tures/1998/oct/ephemere/index.html

[8] Hayden Planetarium: The largest real-time
immersive visualization system, with three dimen-
sional map of the galaxy and spatial sound system
presented in a dome. http://www.sgi.com/ fea-
tures/2000/jan/haydn/index.html

[9] Tokyo National Museum: Recreation of the
Toshodai-ji  temple  as  a  large-scale,  high-
resolution      virtual      environment.
http://www.sgi.com/features/2000/april/toppan/ind
ex.html

[10] Getty Museum (Forum of Trajan): A virtual
reconstruction  of  the  destroyed  forum.

http://www.sgi.com/ features/1998/apr/trajan/

[11] The Tower of Pisa: Panoramic photos viewed
by QuickTime VR. Accessible at

http://www.compart-multimedia.com/virtuale/

[12] Louvre Museum: Museum rooms viewed
with QTVR. Accessible at http://www.louvre.fr

[13] Hermitage Museum: A Virtual Tour using the
IBM HotMedia Java applet in order to view pano-
ramic photos of the Museum’s interior. Accessi-
ble at http://www.hermitage.ru

[14] Parent, A. (1999), "A virtual environment
task-analysis tool for the creation of virtual art
exhibits", Presence, Vol.8, No3, June 1999, ΜΙΤ
Press, Cambridge MA, pp. 355-365.

[15] Sarini, Μ. & Strapparava, C. (1998) "Building
a User Model for a Museum Exploration and In-
formation-Providing Adaptive System", Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Adaptive Hypertext
and Hypermedia, HYPERTEXT'98, Pittsburgh,
USA, June 20-24, 1998.

[16] Charitos, D. (1998), "The Architectural As-
pect of Designing Space in Virtual Environments",
PhD Thesis, Department of Architecture, Univer-
sity of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK.

[17] Charitos, D. & Bridges, A.H. (1997), "On
Architectural Design of Virtual Environments",
Design Studies, Vol. 18, No 2, Elsevier Science
Ltd., pp.143-154.

