Getting Engaged and Getting Tired:
What Is in a Museum Experience

Daniela Petrelli, Elena Not and Massimo Zancanaro

IRST - Cognitive and Communication Technology Division
38050 Povo - Trento - Italy

phone: +39-0461-314444

{ petrelli | not | zancana}@irst.itc.it
url: http://ecate.itc.it:1024/

There is no right or wrong way to visit a museum. The most important rule
you should keep in mind as you go through the front door is to follow your own
instincts. Be prepared to find what excite you, to enjoy what delights your 
heart
and mind, perhaps to have aesthetic experiences you will never forget.

David Finn

How to Visit a Museum

1. Introduction

The physical experience of visiting a museum includes emotion and intellect. 
After the
visit, each person retains not only a cognitive gain, but also the personal 
impressions of an
emotional and psycho-motor experience. The way a person feels during an 
experience becomes
an integral part of that memory. Evoking the feeling or mood at a later time 
may trigger details
of a memory associated with it. The architecture of the building, how the 
exhibition is
organised, the presence of places where to sit and rest possibly while admiring 
a masterpiece,
crowding, long distances to cover or architectural barriers, are all elements 
that can affect the
comfort/discomfort of the visitors, improving or hampering their enjoyment of 
the visit. To
emphasise this «sensitive memory», music, noise and even smell are currently 
added as
background to convey the feeling of immersion (see [1] for an overview on this 
topic). The
influence that each of these aspects has on the overall judgement of the 
experience partly
depends also on the visitor's profile. For example, the frequent visitor’s 
pathway through the
museum is substantially different from the first-time visitor’s. It is far more 
efficient. For non-
frequent visitors, who are less experts on how to move in a museum, instead, 
the physical
fatigue may considerably affect the degree of satisfaction, since the 
appreciation of the art
objects sometimes is not sufficient to compensate for the effort. 
Disorientation might also be a
big problem. The novelty of the museum setting, though for certain aspects 
stimulating and
exciting, might also frighten the new visitor. Maps may help visitors navigate 
through the
exhibition areas to find the items or services that meet their own interest or 
need. But often poor
design and/or inability to translate a two-dimensional display into 
three-dimensional reality
might render the task quite difficult.

Besides the personal experience of moving in a physical space, when visiting a 
museum


there is also the cognitive aspect of moving in a cultural space. Thus in a 
museum environment
it is essential that personal discovering is appropriately supported providing 
visitors with the
suitable amount of information they need, at the right time and place, and in 
the form that
makes it the most acceptable and enjoyable. The quality of the received 
presentation is liable to
subjective judgement. Personal taste typically overcomes objective 
effectiveness and can
prejudice the pleasure of the visit. For example, preliminary testing with 
museum visitors
showed that when information about art was presented to visitors as an audio 
message in form
of  a dialogue, they learnt more, but they retained a bad feeling about the 
audio guide [2]. The
same study showed also that when people feel comfortable with the presentation 
they have a
better judgement of the (same) physical space.

When designing new personal electronic guide to support museum visit, designers 
have
to bear in mind all the known effects and be aware of others unexpected side 
effects. Moreover
the system should monitor visitor’s reactions in order to infer the 
effectiveness of the choices
done and, if necessary, to rearrange the presentation style. This paper 
presents the work that is
going to be done in the HIPS project [3] to cope with the 
feedback-rearrangement process when
emotion and involvement are directed to museum visitors. HIPS, 
Hyper-Interaction within the
Physical Space, is an Esprit long-term research project founded by the European 
Community
and  it is part of the i3 initiative (i3 is Intelligent Interactive 
Interfaces).

2. Integrating the Visit Experience

When projecting a new support for museum or open-air visits, designers have to 
bear in
mind the peculiarities of this scenario. They must always remind that often the 
environment is
variable (especially in museums or temporal exhibitions); any learning that 
takes place is
informal; and any use of exhibit elements is casual and often cursory [4]. 
Therefore, it is
essential to propose technological solutions that provide the visitor with a 
system that
harmonise with these peculiarities. The successful proposal should overcome the 
limits of the
current tools (audio guides and interactive computers) integrating relevant 
ideas with new
technical opportunities. In HIPS we combine the benefits of location-aware 
systems with the
advances made in parallel in the field of adaptive and dynamic hypermedia, 
gaining more
effectiveness in the mobile delivery of information. The system does not simply 
react to the
signals coming from the environment: detecting a movement in the physical space 
is only half
of the work necessary toward an intelligent adaptive location-aware system. 
Visitor's
movements represent a form of implicit input to the system that have to be 
properly interpreted.
Interpreting physical movements as implicit selections, HIPS creates a new way 
of
browsing the information space associated to a museum. Physical hypernavigation 
(that is,
physical movement combined with context-aware browsing in a hypermedia space) 
is very
different from browsing an electronic book or a traditional (even adaptive) 
hypermedia running
on a stationary console. The visitor is experiencing a "real'' situation: 
moving in a real
environment, seeking concrete objects to observe, and receiving perceptual 
orientation
feedback. The system should take into account the prominence of the situational 
context,
integrating the perceptual experience with helpful information, without 
competing with the

original exhibit items for the visitor's attention:

• The system should provide information to help direct the visitor’s 
attention to and
stimulate interest in the objects [5] [6]. This means that messages offered to 
the user should
directly refer to what the visitor  is seeing (also exploiting appropriate 
linguistic forms, e.g.
deictic references as «this object» or «the object on your left»)  and should 
help the user to
identify the object described (and its importance) among the others displayed.

• The information should be preferably conveyed via audio messages, allowing 
the user
to freely concentrate on the concrete objects.

• The system should not overwhelm users with information [7], though 
providing
opportunities for the interested visitor to easily find new and more detailed 
information on a
subject [8]. Although this issue is relevant for  presentation systems in 
general, it becomes
crucial when the visitor is physically moving through museum rooms and standing 
in front of
exhibits. In fact, physical tiredness might appreciably affect  visitor’s 
attitude toward long


commentaries, as well as their satisfaction and learning.

A system effectively supporting physical hypernavigation should integrate the 
individual,
dynamic modeling of the user (their knowledge, interests, goals, integrated 
with abilities,
attitudes and preferences) with a general model of the environment, the 
visitor’s movements
and social context. HIPS aims at coping with all of these requirements. At the 
time of writing
(April 1999) the project is in half its way and, even if a lot of work has been 
done to set up the
first prototype (demonstrated to the European reviewers in March 1999), many 
research issues
are still open.

3. HIPS, Emotions and the Physical Dimension

HIPS aims at developing a new support for visiting cultural heritages. The 
visitor carries
a PDA and freely moves in the physical space approaching exhibits that catch 
their attention.
The system traces their movements and, when it is appropriate, proposes an 
information
presentation dynamically composed taking into account the physical position of 
the visitor, the
story  of interaction (movement in the space and clicking on the PDA screen), 
and the user
model. The presentation mainly consists of an audio message and some relevant 
hyperlinks
displayed on the palmtop screen (figure 1) [9]1. The audio message is a 
concatenation of pre-
recorded audio files.

Figure 1: HIPS user interface

The main idea behind this approach [10] is that each chunk of information can be
presented in many different ways depending on the context. For example, a 
possible
introduction to the portrait of Santa Caterina is «This is the portrait of 
Saint Caterina» used
when the visitor is in front of the fresco and close to it, while «In front of 
you there is the
portrait of Saint Caterina» is used when the visitor is looking at the fresco 
but they are distant.
This approach allows also to experiment different reading styles (e.g. 
masculine vs. feminine,
emphatic vs. weak) as well as different linguistic forms. An example is the use 
of the first

1 Credits for the current HIPS user interface to CB&J.


person, as in «I am Caterina, the protector of Siena», vs. the impersonal, as 
in «This is Saint
Caterina, the protector of Siena». It is worth noting that all these examples 
carry the same
content, a «welcome message» to the portrait of Santa Caterina, but they differ 
in the way the
content is expressed: they use different forms of deixis («This» vs. «In front 
of you») and direct
or indirect speech («I am» vs. «This is»). Each one affects in a different way 
the visitor. In the
first example «This is...» has the purpose to strength the visitor attention 
using a direct reference
to the space, since they are already in front of the fresco observing it. A 
direct reference to the
space is used also in the second example, «In front of you...», but the purpose 
is to focus the
attention of the visitor to the artwork, since the visitor is oriented towards 
the fresco but they
are far and might be distracted. Direct or indirect speech, instead, can be 
used to support
different type of content. For example the use of the first person is good when 
describing the
life of the portrayed character. In this way the visitor is moved to empathise 
with the character.
Instead, the use of the third person has to be preferred when a description of 
the painting (the
style, the use of the colour, etc.) is given.

The physical space plays a central role in HIPS. Visitors are immersed in a 
real, physical
space and receive hints and suggestions from it. HIPS aims at reinforcing the 
sense of space and
comfort by providing navigation proffers supported by properly oriented maps 
(figure 2) and by
using holographic sound to give visitors help in orientation making the sound 
source correspond
to the exhibit location [11]. This would be particularly effective when coupled 
with the use of
different voices or with the use of direct speech. Indeed orientation clues are 
given by the
perceived position of the sound source and by the change of the voice.

Figure 2: A map as used in HIPS.

However, the physical dimension brings also drawbacks: the physical fatigue 
inherent in
the movement may considerably affect the degree of satisfaction. As mentioned 
above, this very
much depends on the visitor’s profile because frequent visitor’s pathway 
through the museum is
far more efficient than first-time visitor’s behaviour is (of course, age and 
physical or mental
handicaps also have to be carefully taken into account). Anyway, for both 
first-time and
frequent visitor, the bleary-eyed phenomenon arrives. It might be after half an 
hour or two
hours, but it is inevitable. To be effective in tailoring its adaptive 
presentations, HIPS should
therefore take into account all these dimensions:


• the physical, that include the exhibition layout, the attractiveness 
of the exhibits, and
the physical fatigue of moving;

• the visitor, to say the intellectual attention and engagement, but 
also the emotive
involvement;

• the visiting path, the rapid or slow moving, the close going to or 
the far staying from
exhibits, the sequence and the frequency of stops.

4. An Overview of the HIPS User Model

The main goal of the user model in HIPS is to adapt the information 
presentation and the
interaction to the modeled user features. To do so the system handles the 
history of the user
movements and interaction with the tool, the interests explicitly declared or 
inferred, the time
spent, and refine the current model with respect to the physical space. Based 
on a model of
user’s knowledge the HIPS system tries to reduce redundancy of presentations, 
whereas an
interest model enables the system to adapt information selection and object 
presentations to the
visitor’s general interests and their special interests in certain object types 
or attributes [12].

An important objective of HIPS is to bridge the gap between the physical space 
and the
information space. This means that visitor’s movements have to be interpreted 
by the system to
better adapt information. An adaptive system should support the interaction 
with the
environment in a natural and non-intrusive way since the main objective of 
visitors remains the
fruition of art.

Visitors’ behaviour has been widely studied in museum literature. In particular 
Veron
and Levasseur [13] conducted an ethnographic study on people behaviour in 
artistic exhibitions.
On the bases of paths and movements, time spent in front of a single artwork 
and total visit
span, the study identifies four categories of visitors:

• ant visitors are those who follow the path proposed by the curator, 
spending quite a
long time observing all (or almost all) artworks. Ant visitors usually go close 
to the artworks.

•fish visitors move preferably in the centre of the room, cruising the 
exhibition. Fish
visitors do not look at details of artwork but prefer a more holistic 
observation.

• butterfly visitors are used to frequently change direction, without 
following the
proposed path. The butterfly sees almost all the artworks, stopping frequently. 
The visit is
leaded by the affordance of the physical space and therefore it is linked to 
the exhibition layout.

• grasshopper visitors see only artworks they are interested in. Their 
visit is leaded by
personal interests and pre-existing knowledge about the contents of the 
exhibition. The
grasshopper crosses empty spaces, stops rarely, and the times spent to observe 
single selected
artworks is long.

Veron and Levasseur categories are being adopted in HIPS for defining a dynamic 
user
visiting style model based on the analysis of the physical movement. The 
visiting style model

[14] is useful either (i) to determine the correct amount of information to be 
presented, and (ii)
to determine the level of detail a presentation should contain.

5. Monitoring Visitor’s Behaviour to Detect Emotions

The aspects of the user model currently considered in HIPS are mainly related 
to the
cognitive aspects. In fact, profile, knowledge and interest do model the 
rational part of the visit.
Even if they are of great value when coping with free form learning 
environments as museums
are, they fail in giving an estimation of the emotive involvement. As mentioned 
in the previous
chapters, three are the dimensions that affect visitors’ feeling: the personal 
attitude, the
environment, and the visit.

Especially when art is the focus, personality is a relevant aspect. As David 
Finn points


out [7], «Discrimination is a necessary component of appreciation. [...] Tastes 
vary from
individual to individual and change constantly with the passage of time. And 
inevitably this
affects our enjoyment of and response to particular works of art.»

Another important factor highlighted by museum studies is the «personal 
agenda», to say
the set of hopes and expectations that visitors get when entering the museum 
[15]. Expectations
determine a personal projection of what the visiting experience will be, based 
on previous
experiences and common sense. The personal agenda derives from a variety of 
sources and
deeply affects the memory of the visit. For example, visitors that have heard 
they must see a
certain painting will feel the visit somehow be incomplete if they miss it, no 
matter how
wonderful was the rest of the visit.

The agenda and the attitude to the museum deeply affect the behaviour (i.e. the 
visiting
style). At the beginning, most visitors do not appear to allow personal 
interest or the
attractiveness of the exhibit to play significant roles (they are ants), but as 
visit goes on they
change their behaviour depending on their personality and agenda. For example 
who has as
important point to see all the museum (mainly occasional or first-time 
visitors) may start

«cruising» the exhibition (becoming a fish), while who is more used to museums 
will
concentrate on the objects that attract them (becoming a butterfly).

Despite the personal dimension, physical exhibition layout and artwork display 
deeply
influence visitor’s reaction. Physical characteristics of both space and 
artworks are used by
museum curators to dramatise. Museum studies codified the effectiveness of a 
display
measuring the behaviour of visitors. In particular the attractive and holding 
power of each
exhibit are calculated on the mean of the visitors who stop in front of it and 
on the mean of the
stop span [16]. This measure is very useful to infer emotional involvement by 
movements since
artworks that have a high attracting power are likely to induce emotions. To 
make attracting and
holding power more effective it can be coupled with a marker of the type of 
suggestion the
artwork is supposed to evoke. For example Guernica by Picasso is a strongly 
dramatic painting,
while Waterlilies by Monet would suggest fresh and bucolic sensations.

When talking about the physical dimension, it is worth noting that the artwork 
size and
position are important factors when trying to figure out the visitor’s 
sensations. Indeed if the
painting is huge, an emotional involvement is more likely to happen when the 
visitor is not
close to it thus perceiving the whole, while a closer position would show 
interest in the details.
HIPS has a Physical Organization Knowledge Base that maintain a description of 
the exhibition
space and can reason on the visitor’s position (e.g. giving an estimation of 
the closeness or the
orientation).

The third element that has to be taken into account is the visit. Museum 
studies showed
that visitors’ attention and visitors’ tiredness change during the visit. The 
high attention level
characterising the beginning of the visit, generally drops after thirty 
minutes, while museum
fatigue  is a recognised parameter that arises after a certain period (around 
one hour for most
visitors) [15]. Visitor’s tiredness is clearly shown by visitor’s behaviour 
since it corresponds to
the decline in both the number of exhibits visitors look at and in the length 
of time visitors view
each exhibit as their time in museum passes.

Attention and tiredness affect deeply visit enjoyment: «There is a distinct, 
almost
measurable response curve in visiting a museum, with those objects you see at 
the outset
making a greater impact than those you see later on. The rate of diminishing 
response varies
from individual to individual and may also vary from museum to museum. The 
climax of your
visit could come at any point along the way, but the bleary-eyed phenomenon is 
inevitable, and
you definitely will be able to absorb less of what you see as times goes on.» 
[7] This means that
the time in a visit when an artwork is seen can affect the emotion. At the 
opposite, the time
spent in front of it do not necessary show a stronger emotion: «[...] the depth 
of appreciation is
not a function of time. It is possible to look at an object for five seconds 
and be overcome by its
beauty. Or one may spend many minutes discovering details in an object that are 
not apparent at
first sight.» This last comment by Finn let us hypothesise that what museum 
curators call
visitors’ engagement shows more an intellectual interest than an emotional one. 
Indeed,
visitors’ engagement is revealed when a visitor pays attention to an exhibit by 
looking at it,


reading accompanying labels, touching or manipulating the object, or discussing 
the exhibit
with another person [1]. This definition seems very far from what a system 
(lacking of
sophisticated image processing) can do to measure engagement. Nevertheless, 
some simple but
effective approximations can be attempted: in HIPS terms, engagement is assumed 
when the
visitor stops in front of an object (i.e. at least three seconds in the active 
zone close to the
object), listens to the presentation (i.e. neither stopping it nor exiting the 
zone), and asks for
more information. This conscious acts (looking at the PDA or selecting a link) 
show a polarity
on the «cognitive engagement» of the visitors as opposed to their «emotional 
involvement». It
is important to underline that the two status are not mutually exclusive: it is 
possible to feel
emotionally involved at first and then develop a more cognitive interest in the 
same artwork
while carefully observing it.

It is clear now that in a scenario of museum visit, the range of possible hints 
the system
can look for to guess visitor’s emotion is wide. Nevertheless all these clues 
are indirect
measures since they are not directly taken from the visitor (i.e. looking at 
their facial expression
or measuring their sweat). This means that they have to be carefully blended to 
get applicable
and effective rules.

HIPS would use many source of information to infer the visitor current status. 
From the
description of the environment it will take exhibit layout characteristics 
(e.g. its size) and
current visitor position, preferred positions for a better view, emotional 
attributes (e.g. dramatic
vs. bucolic), attractive and holding power. Also the presence of places where 
to rest plays an
important role. It is not uncommon to enjoy masterpiece while set.

As attribute of the personal attitude it is important to consider if the 
visitor listens to the
whole presentation or interrupts it and asks for more information or ignore the 
proposed
hyperlinks (i.e. visitor engagement). Some guesses on personal test can be done 
on the bases of
the reaction (i.e. ask more or stop) to the current presentation. Detecting the 
personal test can be
done otherwise only through explicit request.

Finally the time of visit has to be taken into account. In fact, in absence of 
strict time
constraints, when entering a museum, visitors normally have a feeling of how 
much time they
will(wish to) spend looking at the exhibition. The expected duration is 
normally a function of
how much accustomed the user is to museum visits, of his cultural level, of his 
interest to the
specific exhibition topics. These attitudes will be reflected by their visiting 
style. The initial
visitor's expectation can also change during the visit according to their 
enjoyment of the
exhibition: typical signals for this change are an increase in interest for the 
items displayed and
a slow down in moving speed (i.e. changing visit style from fish to butterfly). 
As the visit
proceeds the attention decreases. When tiredness starts to affect the visit, a 
careful visitor would
speed up the visit and start cruising the museum paying less attention to the 
artworks (i.e. from
ant to fish).

Combining all these measures the system should be able to give an estimation of 
the
visitor feeling (cognitive vs. emotional) at a certain time and for a certain 
artwork. Moreover it
would provide the Presentation Planner (see next chapter) valuable information, 
like tiredness
and engagement, that will affect the type of presentation.

6. Generating Tailored Presentations

Inferring engagement, attention/tiredness, and cognitive or emotional 
involvement is not
an easy task, but still it is just the first step. All this information have to 
be properly considered
when planning the next presentation to be offered to the visitor. In this 
section, we will briefly
introduce the core architecture of the HIPS engine (figure 3) and we will show 
how this
architecture can be exploited for better supporting visitors (the complete 
architecture is reported
in  [17]).


Figure 3: simplified HIPS architecture

As discussed above, HIPS presentations are composed by concatenating 
pre-recorded
audio files. Audio files are organised in groups called macronodes that roughly 
correspond to
paragraphs. Each macronode have been annotated with rhetorical links, that tell 
how the
content of a macronode supports the content in another macronode (for example, 
evidence,
elaboration, background etc. see [18]). See figure 4 for a sample sketch of the 
macronode
network.

Figure 4: Sample portion of macronode network

When the Presentation Planner is requested to build a presentation for a given 
concept, it
selects a relevant macronode for that concept and then traverses the graph of 
the rhetorical links
to collect other relevant macronodes to add to the presentation. The decision 
rules take into
consideration the visitor’s physical position, the history of the previous 
presentations and the
user model2.

2 As mentioned the User Model includes, besides the user involvement model 
discussed in this
paper, the profile, knowledge and interest model (developed by GMD) and the 
visiting style model
(developed by the University of Siena).


Another relevant module in the HIPS architecture is the Intelligent Input 
Analyser, it
detects the visitor gestures on the interface (i.e. stopping of a 
presentations, selecting a follow
up suggestion, etc.) and the visitor’s movements, and decides, on the basis of 
the User Model
and the current situation, whether to request the Presentation Planner a new 
presentation.

If the User Involvement Model properly infers engagement, attention, tiredness 
and
emotive status, this information can be exploited as new rules for both the 
Intelligent Input
Analyser and the Presentation Planner, for example,

•  if the tiredness is high, the Input Analyser can request the 
Presentation Planner to
build general presentations instead of specific ones, carefully taking into 
account
distances and physical obstacles (e.g., stairs) when proposing how the tour 
should
proceed;

•  if attention is low, the Presentation Planner can avoid to add elaboration 
links to the
current presentation;

•  if engagement with a specific object is low, the Input Analyser can 
entirely skip a
presentation on that object;

•  if attention and engagement on a specific object are high, the 
Input Analyser decides
the generation of additional related information (and if the user showed a 
positive
attitude towards movement, the Presentation Planner possibly suggests other
interesting objects nearby);

•  if emotional involvement is high the Presentation Planner can 
propose an appropriate
piece of music instead of a description. Emotion can be strength proposing a 
poem or
the author comment too;

•  if attention is low but the interest on a certain object is high 
the Input Analyzer can
decide to push a suggestive presentation (for example using a first person
presentation) in order to catch the visitor’s attention.

In general, if the user model will properly give a picture of who the visitor 
is, the
Presentation Planner will be able to apply some of the suggestions given by 
museum experts to
cope with the mental fatigue of visiting, such as increasing the variety of 
presentations in terms
of both different contents and different reading styles. This hopefully will 
bring HIPS to be not
only a valuable guide when the visitor wants information about a particular 
artist or a group of
works, but also a tool to support personal discovery and enjoyment.

Acknowledgements

Authors are grateful to the HIPS partners for the valuable discussions and 
work. The
HIPS consortium includes: University of Siena (Italy)(co-ordinator), CB&J-Paris 
(France),
GMD (Germany), ITC-IRST (Italy), SINTEF (Norway), University College Dublin 
(Ireland),
and University of Edinburgh (Scotland).

Bibliography

[1] LOZOWSKI BOISVERT, D. and JOCHUMS SLEZ B., The relationship between exhibit
characteristics and learning-associated behaviours in a science museum 
discovery space.
Science Education, vol. 79, n. 5, 1995.

[2] CONVERTINO, G., Uno studio esplorativo sui sistemi multimediali in uso nei 
musei.
Master thesis (unpublished), March 1997.

[3] HIPS project, WWW home page: http://www.ltt.dii.unisi.it/progetti/HIPS


[4] SERRELL, B. and B. RAPHLING. Computers on the Exhibit Floor. Curator, 
35(3), 1992.

[5] BITGOOD, S.C. and PATTERSON, D.D., The effects of gallery changes on 
visitor reading
and object viewing time. Environment and Behaviour, 25(6), November 1993. 
Special Issue on
Environmental Design and Evaluation in Museums.

[6] LOZOWSKI BOISVERT, D. and JOCHUMS SLEZ, B., The relationship between visitor
characteristics and learning-associated behaviours in a science museum 
discovery space.
Science Education, 78(2):137-148, 1994.

[7] FINN, D., How to Visit a Museum. H.N. Abram, Inc. Publisher, 1985.

[8] SERRELL, B., Exhibit Labels. An Interpretative Approach. AltaMira Press, 
1996.

[9] BROADBENT, J., Handheld Location-aware User Interfaces. presented at i3 
Annual
Conference, October 1999, forthcoming.

[10] NOT, E. and ZANCANARO, M., Content Adaptation for Audio-based Hypertexts in
Physical Environments. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Adaptive 
Hypertext and
Hypermedia, held in conjunction with HYPERTEXT ‘98. Pittsburgh, June 20-24, 
1998

[11] BROADBENT, J., MARTI, P., An experiential modality of exploring physical 
and virtual
spaces. presented at i3 Annual Conference, Nyborg, June 1998.

[12] HIPS WP1, Adapting presentations to the User and to the Situational 
Context in
Hypernavigating the Physical Space, n. RR 1.5, December 1998

[13] VERON, E., LEVASSEUR, M., Ethnographie de l’exposition, Paris, Bibliothèque
publique d'Information, Centre Georges Pompidou., 1983.

[14] MARTI, P., RIZZO, A., PETRONI, L., TOZZI, G., and DILIGENTI, M., Adapting 
the
Museum: A Non-Intrusive User Modeling Approach. proc. of UM99, in press, 1999.

[15] FALK, J. H. and DIERKING, L.D., The Museum Experience, Whalesback Books, 
1992.

[16] SERRELL, B., Paying Attention: The Duration and Allocation of Visitors’ 
Time in
Museum Exhibitions, Curator, vol. 40, n. 2, June 1997.

[17] HIPS WP2, Report on Architectural Design, n. PR2.1, to appear in July 
1999.

[18] MANN, W., Thompson, S, Rhetorical Structure Theory: A Theory of Text 
Organization.
In: L.Polanyi (ed.) The Structure of Discourse, Ablex Publishing Corporation, 
1987.

