Adaptive Mobile Museum Guide for Information
and Learning on Demand

Reinhard Oppermann and Marcus Specht

GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology
Institute                             for Applied Information Technology 
(FIT-MMK)

1 Goal

The paper describes a nomadic information system under development by GMD in
the HIPS¹ project that supports nomadic activities adapted to the individual 
visitor
of a museum. The world-wide Web, wired and wireless connectivity to networks,
and small mobile devices allow for supporting nomadic activities by information
and communication technology to an extensive degree. Mobile information technol-
ogy is a chance to support the process of activities from the beginning to the 
end,
distributed over time, across space and between actors.

The paper describes a nomadic information system designed to support adaptive 
in-
formation and adaptive learning of visitors during art excursions. An 
information
system is said to be nomadic when the user has access to his or her personal 
infor-
mation space from all places independent from specific devices. The art domain 
is
attractive for a nomadic information system because art excursions require 
nomadic
activities from visitors and art can best be enjoyed when the recipient has 
access to
information about an art object when he or she is in front of the art object. 
In front

1  The project Hyperinteraction within Physical spaces (HIPS) is an 
EU-supported LTR
project in ESPRIT I3. The partners of the consortium are University of Siena 
(co-
ordinating partner), University  of  Edinburgh,  University  College  Dublin,  
ITC,
SINTEF and GMD, CB&J, and Alcatel.


of an art object the motivation to learn more about the object can be assumed 
to be
higher than without the authentic impression of an art exhibition. We want to 
use
the effect of situated learning known in task contexts in order to support 
situated
learning in an interest context.

2 The system

The system described in this paper was implemented for the art collection in 
the cas-
tle of Birlinghoven, the headquarter of the GMD in Sankt Augustin near Bonn – 
see
http://hippie.gmd.de:8080/ (A second exhibition domain, the CeBIT 99 with 20
exhibits at the GMD-booth, has been used to show the generality of the 
prototype.)

In the museum the system supports a mini-laptop with infrared for location 
identifi-
cation and wireless LAN for data transmission to and from the server and touch
screen and headphones for user input/out. For the shortcomings of user control 
of
audio presentation auxiliary visual presentations are designed to complement the
understanding of or the navigation through the audio information. Besides a 
stan-
dard  audio player lists of exhibition items with several sort options are 
presented in
a content overview and buttons for attributes of the exhibits allow for 
directly re-
questing specific information.

The information selection and presentation follows the user’s movement in the
physical space. The user can also move through the information space. Both kinds
of control are combined and to be communicated to the user to avoid confusion or
to limit information access. The system tries to combine the movement in the
physical and the information space by presenting visual and audio cues when the
visitor passes exhibits identified by the user model to be relevant for him or 
her. A
sound icon and a blinking visual icon indicate a new exhibit without 
interrupting a
current presentation. The user is free to select a new presentation whenever he 
or she
wants but is not patronised by automated presentations. The same is true for 
adap-
tive suggestions. The system evaluates the seen exhibits and suggests a tour 
with
exhibits of the same group of exhibits the visitor seems to like, i.e., a 
particular
type of an artwork (like painting), a particular period (like renaissance), a 
particular
genre (like mythology). The system also evaluates the attributes of exhibits 
the visi-
tor selects (like historical background or the composition and form design of a
painting) and adapts the default sequence of attributes to the visitor’s 
interests.


3 Needs of nomadic users

Nomadic information systems need particular presentation, interaction and 
adapta-
tion. Presentation modalities reflect the specific conditions of the nomadic 
scenario.
The user’s visual attention is directed toward the physical environment and can 
be
complemented by audio presentation of the information system via headphones. A
mobile device of a museum visitor does not allow for extensive command input
with classical input techniques but needs simple input by primarily deictic com-
mands (clicking on a touchscreen) or speech input (cf. Oppermann and Specht
1999).

Adaptations have to reflect the current user’s local environment 
(contextualisation)
and interaction history (individualisation). Activities at different places 
need differ-
ent interaction with an information system. At home when preparing an excursion
the information system is the central focus of the user’s attention. He or she 
is sit-
ting in front of the system, selecting, reading and writing information 
presented on
the screen. Outdoor the user interacts with objects within a physical space and 
the
attention is directed towards the physical and social environment. A nomadic 
infor-
mation system should adapt to the different phases and places of activities.

Nomadic adaptive systems require both a user model where the information accord-
ing to user interests, knowledge, and preferences is evaluated and a usage model
where the information about the user’s environment and client hardware and 
software
is held up-to-date. To achieve this, mobile information technology can be 
combined
with technologies to identify the users’ environment and his or her position in 
the
physical space (Abowd et al. 1997). Infrared or the General Positioning 
Satellite
system (GPS) allows for localising the device of the user. The position and the
movement                                         in the physical space can be 
observed and evaluated for required informa-
tion. The navigation in the physical and in the information space can be used 
as in-
dicators for the user’s interests, preferences, and the knowledge acquired so 
far.

For information in general and for learning in particular it is preferable in 
terms of
effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction for the person to learn new elements 
em-
bedded into a familiar frame. Repetition is a reinforcing factor for learning. 
Combin-
ing new and familiar items can augment not only learning results. Also the 
enjoy-
ment of attraction environments can be increased when the person gets new 
aspects
of an already known topic. The system evaluates the knowledge of the user in 
terms
of seen-entities and presents information about the exhibit in question by its 
name
and a thumbnail representation with additional information that fits the 
inferred visi-
tor’s interests but has not been presented earlier.


4 Situated learning with a nomadic system

Studies show that learning embedded in the task context is more effective and 
effi-
cient than separate learning organised before task accomplishment (Norman and
Spohrer 1996, 26). Situated action (Suchman 1987) and contextualised learning
(Lave and Wenger 1991; Vosniadou 1994) are keywords to describe a situation as 
an
important motivational and cognitive factor for successful learning. The idea 
of situ-
ated learning in the task context goes back to the constructivistic assumption 
that
learning is not a passive reception or a transfer of knowledge from one subject
(teacher) to another subject (student) but learning is an active 
(re-)construction of
knowledge by the student. The teacher can be seen as an organiser of the 
knowledge
construction process by providing learning material and learning methods. 
Situated
learning helps people to acquire the knowledge necessary to solve a problem or 
to
understand a situation without switching mentally to a separate learning 
activity.

Learning with a nomadic information system allows for exploring art exhibits 
more
extensively in front of the artwork than classical media (and more individually 
than
a human guide). Not only descriptive data like artist, dateline, style, or 
motive but
also formal art analysis like composition or form and colour design can be sup-
ported. The visitor has the chance to consult the system to understand the back-
ground of a painting and understand how the painting is designed. He or she can
apply the interpretation to the perception of the current painting on the wall. 
The
visitor can progressively learn to understand paintings more and more 
competently.

Situated learning is process oriented learning (Mandl, Gruber and Renkl 1995). 
In
case of unsolved problems or incompletely understood situations later learning 
sup-
port has to take into account previous efforts of the learner. A nomadic system 
con-
nects several sessions of the learner by providing access to questions and 
notes the
visitor stores for subsequent phases of excursions. At home, for example, the 
user
can enter questions for the museum to view details of form or colour design. In 
the
museum when information provided by the system is insufficient for a historical 
in-
terest of the individual the visitor can enter a question to be analysed later 
at home
with                                           more extensive access to 
external information bases.

5 Evaluation

Evaluations of the system have been started with domain experts, i.e., artists, 
art
educators, and museum curators during a one-day demonstration and feedback work-
shop.


The experts confirmed the added value of the nomadic information system both for
the process support of preparing, conducting, and evaluating a museum visit and 
for
the understanding of the artworks with respect to the wide spectrum of 
information
provided by the system. The participants pointed out that the user-system 
interac-
tion of a mobile guide has to be designed for specific requirements of the 
exhibition
domain. On the one hand, in technical exhibitions a mix of automatic offers and 
ac-
tive requests of information might have a stimulating effect. On the other 
hand, in
art exhibitions, perceiving art might be limited by a conflict between 
promenading
and searching information. The permanent offer of structured information might 
ob-
struct the visitor to get involved in a silent conversation with an artwork and 
to de-
velop an individual understanding. Providing personalized views and individual
tours was appreciated. Especially personalized information for visitor 
interests and
knowledge was considered important. Adaptive information selection reduces 
redun-
dancy and information overload. The overall feedback was very positive expecting
that new media guides increases the attraction of museums.

6 References:

Abowd, G. D., Dey, A. K., Abowd, G., Orr, R., Brotherton, J. (1997). Context-
awareness in wearable and ubiquitous computing. 1st International Symposium on
Wearable Computers, 1997. Proceedings of ISWC'97, October 13-14, 1997 .

Kleinrock, L. (1997). Nomadicity: Anytime, Anywhere. In: A Disconnected World,
Invited paper, Mobile Networks and Applications, 1 (1997), 4, pp. 351-357.

Lave, J. and Wenger. E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate peripheral 
participa-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mandl, H., Gruber, H., Renkl, A. (1995). Situiertes Lernen in multimedialen
Lernumgebungen. Forschungsbericht  Nr.  50  (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München Institut für Pädagogische Psychologie und Empirische Pädagogik).

Norman, D. A, and Spohrer, J. C. (1996). Learner-Centered Education. Introduc-
tion. Communications of the ACM 39 (1996), 4, 26 - 27.

Vosniadou, S. (1994). From cognitive theory to educational technology. In: S.
Vosniadou, E. De Corte and H. Mandl eds.: Technology-based learning environ-
ments. Psychological and educational foundations. Berlin: Springer, pp. 11-18.

Suchman, L.A. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, UK.

