Personal Reporting of a Museum Visit as an Entrypoint
to Future Cultural Experience

Charles Callaway, Tsvi Kuflik, Elena Not, Alessandra Novello, Oliviero Stock,
Massimo Zancanaro

ITC-irst,

Via Sommarive 18,

38050 Povo, Italy

+39 0461 314521

{callaway, kuflik, not, novello, stock, zancana}@itc.it


ABSTRACT

Museum visitors can continue interacting with museum exhibits
even after they have left the museum. We can help them do this
by creating a report that includes a basic, personalized narration
of their visit, the items and relationships they found most
interesting, pointers to additional related online information, and
suggestions for future visits to the current and other museums. In
this work we describe the automatic generation of personalized
natural language reports to help create one episode in an ongoing
coherent                      sequence of cultural activities.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.5.1 Multimedia Information Systems.

General Terms

Human Factors.

Keywords

Personalized  Information  Presentation,  Natural  Language
Generation,                           Continous Interaction.

1. INTRODUCTION

Museum visitors can learn additional information about museum
exhibits through either written text or spoken audio presentations
that correspond to the artworks they see before them. These
presentations have traditionally been constructed using Natural
Language Generation (NLG), and typically describe historical,
functional, and physical data about objects in museum collections
[1,2,3]. However, extended explanations of museum exhibits are
not the only possible application of NLG technology in cultural
settings.  The introduction of mobile computing devices with
localization and orientation information allows for a new range of
dynamic interactions involving NLG applications.

The report generation project within the PEACH1 project has the
goal of allowing visitors to continue interacting with exhibits even
after they have left the museum by creating a written report in
English or Italian that includes a basic narration of their visit, the
items and relationships they found most interesting with images

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).

IUI’05, January 9–12, 2005, San Diego, California, USA.
ACM 1-58113-894-6/05/0001.

placed near the text to let them recall the artworks, and links to
additional information on the internet as a natural followup for a
specific visitor’s interests. Unlike the STOP [3] report generation
system, our system works in multiple languages and does not
require any explicit information from the user. This extended
interaction allows visitors to learn more about topics of interest
and even plan future visits in this and other museums where they
can get relevant information they initially did not see due to
various constraints such as limited visit time. Thus the current
visit becomes an episode in an ongoing coherent sequence.

2. ELEMENTS OF MUSEUM VISIT
SUMMARIES

Ideally, such a report should consider:

a) Factual aspects of the visit, such as exhibits visited, the visit
sequence  and  time  spent  at  different  locations,  the
presentations shown to the user, and user actions.

b) Appearance of the report, combining text, images and
possibly additional forms of media, in a personalized manner
either on paper or in an electronic form.

c) Cognitive aspects related to the exhibitions, such as interest
for                         themes, pleasure, boredom etc.

d) Extra  subject-centered  aspects,  such  as  persons  met,
discussions held and additional events that occurred.

e) Attention-grabbing elements and hints for subsequent reading
and                        visiting (in this and other museums).

3. WHAT MAKES A GOOD REPORT?

The quality of the report is essential: it should be a memory aid
for later consultation, something one can share with others, and an
entry point for getting deeper into a subject. It should be short but
readable and concrete. Details often are important, but only when
relevant                            to the specific visitor.

Important aspects of the report are: its organization – it could be
Sequential following the particular sequence of visited exhibits,
preserving  the  visiting  path  and  recording  events  in  a
chronological order; it can be Thematic, by depicting the essential
themes the user was interested in, or it can combine both of these.
The content of the report should include details related to the

¹ http://peach.itc.it. The PEACH project is funded by the
Autonomous Province of Trento.


visitor’s requests for information, interesting connections between
seemingly unrelated exhibits, comparisons between the exhibits
the visitor found interesting, and descriptions of related exhibits
they would probably have been interested in but didn’t have a
chance to see. It also should allow some flexibility and variation,
so that two users visiting together and walking on the same path

concepts beyond those that were associated with the presentation
seen by the visitor (for example, specific concepts are augmented
by following links such as "generalization", "instance of",
"appears                           in" and more).

Report Generator


may get different reports.

The report should make the visitor want to continue to study the

User Modeling

Component

Queries

Concepts

Knowledge
Base


topics depicted by the exhibits and make this study easy by
suggesting relevant links to follow up at a later date, additional
items to visit (either now or on a future visit) and possible
additional exhibits in nearby museums. Because museum visitors
typically come from all over the globe, it is desirable to provide
them with the report in their native language. The final report can

Movies

Events /
Requests

Dynamic
Multimedia

User
Data

Kadjadjjfdal
akjdjaskkdd

User
Data

Deep

Concepts
Requests

Queries


be produced either as printed hardcopy and handed to the visitor
as they leave, emailed with hyperlinks generated inline within the

Generator

djakkdjldkla

dlflsjdjsijsa

NLG

Plans

Text

Planner


text, or as a complete multimedia show at a museum kiosk that
combines their interests into a dynamically produced film.

4. REPORT GENERATION IN PEACH

In the PEACH scenario, a museumgoer's visit to a museum is
augmented by a hand-held location-aware PDA that serves as a
museum visitor’s guide, and which is logged and then used to
determine that visitor's individual interests. A custom report is
printed and given at the end of the visit to the Torre Aquila (the
“Eagle Tower”, containing unique frescos depicting year-round
life in the Middle Ages at Trento area). It includes an overview of
the frescos and themes seen, additional information about specific
topics they appeared to have been interested in, non-obvious
relationships to other similar topics they didn't have time to see,
and follow-up web links to sites of local Trentino art to continue
exploring these topics at home.

4.1 Main Components

The PEACH report generator is composed of an NLG system and
a user modeling component, both based on a multilingual domain
knowledge base (KB). Figure 1 shows the top-level system
architecture.

The Multilingual Domain Knowledge Base (KB) contains
detailed representations of most of the eleven frescos in the Torre
Aquila. It has a domain ontology, facts about each fresco as a
whole and the visual elements they contain, generic concepts
which are not visually represented but may be used to explain
them (like “aristocracy” or “winter”), and links between facts to
allow for inference (such as comparisons, and complementary
information).

The Dynamic User Modeler (UM) logs information about the
visitors during their visit, based on their behavior. There is no
initial information about the visitor when starting each visit, since
user modeling must be “non-intrusive”. As a result, the model is
built solely by observing the visitor’s behavior.

Every presentation has a set of KB associated with it, providing a
description of its content. The UM contains inferred information
about the level of interest the visitor has in the concepts
associated with the presentations she saw. Using an inference
mechanism that follows ontological links in the KB, the specific
concepts associated with the presentations are augmented by
additional, related concepts that extend interest to categories of

Figure 1: PEACH System Architecture

Explicit user feedback in the form of pressing a “WOW” button
(for positive reaction) or an “ENOUGH” button (for negative
reaction) and implicit feedback in the form of “no objection” to
the presentation are used to infer user interest in the various topics
presented by the presentations that the visitor sees. Explicit
feedback has a higher priority than implicit feedback in the sense
that explicit feedback drives the immediate change in level of
interest while implicit feedback requires accumulation of
evidence before changing a visitor’s interest level in a given
concept. Interest values are assigned to the specific concepts,
based on user feedback. The values decay as we follow links from
the original concept to other concepts them as a function of the
semantic distance. This information is used during the visit to
help prepare the presentation for the visitor based on her visit
history and according to the inferred level of interest in the
various topics. Finally, the accumulated UM is preserved for a
visit summary report, generated at the end of the visit.

The Text Planner (TP) determines the most relevant information
to put into the description and its coherent organization. In the
case of report generation, coherence refers to correct selection of
topics and details and their placement in sentences to achieve
recognizable sequential and thematic structures. Information
(content) about the artworks seen is extracted from the KB (e.g.,
objects like castles or wild animals in a fresco, their positions, and
what activities they are performing) and given either important
roles such as the main topic of a paragraph or else that of
supporting                        detail.

For adaptive generation that is highly personalized for a particular
museumgoer’s visit, it is important to ensure a high amount of
variation in the resulting text. To achieve such variability, the text
planner queries the user model to get the log of the user
interactions. For instance, to sequentially describe what the visitor
saw, the text planner extracts from the log contained in the UM
the list of visited frescoes and accesses the KB to get a shallow
description of the main contents of each artwork (e.g., objects like
castles or wild animals in a fresco, their positions, and what
activities they are performing) to be included in the summary as a
reminder of what was seen. Alternatively, the TP can retrieve a
list of ranked topics from the inferred interest model. Thus the
corresponding thematic report may consist of a series of
paragraphs describing the top items in the interest model.  To


prevent repetition, we also cluster items in the interest model that
are semantically related. Which details from the KB to include
and how they are ordered are determined by text planning rules
which                          query the UM.

Writing the Actual Report Text The text of the report is created
using the language-independent StoryBook deep NLG system [2].
While the TP takes care of high level communicative goals and
varies the report to make sure it is individualized, the generation
component focuses on low-level issues, such as adding pronouns,
making sure sentences have subjects and verbs, adding
morphology to word stems, etc. Deep NLG has advantages that
make  it useful in generating extended reports in a museum
context: the text can be in multiple languages, produced in high-
quality prose, provide for automatic variation at the lexical level,
and contain integrated markup (such as HTML, or prosody for
TTS). Formatting is particularly useful for report generation, as it
allows for the creation of the report as a webpage, with hyperlinks
and images of artworks for each paragraph, allowing the visitor to
mentally associate them with the text as they are reading about
their experience with it. The final report can be printed or emailed
in either English or Italian.

5. AN EXAMPLE

Figure 2 presents two paragraphs taken from an adaptive thematic
summary report for a museum visit. The first half summarizes the
most interesting topics as inferred by the system after the visit and
clustered into abstract elements such as “winter leisure activities”.
The description corresponds to a visitor who started at the January
fresco that includes scenes of a castle, a snowball fight, and
hunters in the snow. She requested a follow up presentation
describing the snowball fight, followed by more detailed
presentations of its participants and later about the hunting scene
and  one of the hunters. Later, she moved to the February fresco
where she saw an overview about a tournament with knights and a
blacksmith in his shop. She requested more detailed presentations,
one about a specific knight taking part in the tournament, another
about the blacksmith and a third about the servants helping the
knights put on armor. Finally, she returned to the January fresco
and learned more about the hunting scene, including the hunters,
their                         dogs, and a fox.

As a result of this scenario, the UM builds an interest model
representing the visitor’s interest in the hunting scene and its
details and also in the snowball fight (both aristocratic activities),
hence she is interested in aristocratic life in Trento in the middle
ages.

The TP clusters the interests to produce abstract topics such as
“aristocratic  activities”  rather  than  “knights”  and  “ladies”
individually. If well-defined clusters can be created, the TP then
chooses a thematic report centered on the top clusters in the list.
Otherwise, the system chooses a sequential report that describes
what the visitor saw in order, pulling details from the interest
model. In either case, variation in the report text is ensured at the
organizational level, depending on the visitor’s path through the
museum and their requests for further details. The TP has a
number of rules which can be used to add new details to the text
of the report, such as the following:

General-Interest-In (Activity) ⮳

Focused-Interest (Activity) + Contrastive-Interest (Activity)

+ EventDetail (Contrasting Activity)

This rule means that when there is an activity going on in a scene
that seemed to be interesting to the visitor (for example the
tournament). The system searches for information about the
activity the visitor was focused on. Then it looks for a contrastive
activity which was also interesting for the user and gets its details
for adding a short description of it to the report.

…

It seems that you were mainly interested in the winter
leisure activities such as hunting, the tournament, and
the snowball fight, where groups of nobleman are
throwing snowballs at each other, since you spent most
of  the time in front of the January and February frescos
representing winter aristocratic leisure activities.

…

Based on your preferences you showed during your
visit, you should probably go visit Castel Ivano, where
there are also many other frescos with depictions of
winter.

...

Figure 2: Selected report extracts

6. CONCLUSIONS

This work demonstrates a use of NLG for automatic personalized
museum visit reporting. We believe personal report generation
will become an increasingly important application for many
activities. In this cultural visit domain the report is an interactive
artifact and is the basis for getting deeper into the themes that
seemed of higher interest in this visit. The report integrates
images to help remembering and hot spots to suggest additional
attractive material for the specific visitor, with the spirit that a
cultural experience is successful if it induces the visitor to
cultivate                           the interest further.

7. REFERENCES

[1] I. Androutsopoulos, J. Calder, E. Not, F. Pianesi and

M. Roussou. MPIRO: Coherence, Relevance and
Appropriateness in Information Presentation. In the
Proceedings of the 2002 CLASS Workshop. Verona,
Italy, 2002.

[2] C. Callaway and J. Lester. Narrative Prose Generation.
Artificial Intelligence 139(2):213—252, 2002.

[3] E Reiter, R Robertson, and L Osman. Lessons from a
Failure:  Generating  Tailored  Smoking  Cessation
Letters. Artificial Intelligence 144:41-58.

[4] C. Rocchi, O. Stock, M. Zancanaro, M. Kruppa, A.
Krueger. ‘The Museum Visit: Generating Seamless
Personalized  Presentations  on  Multiple  Devices’
Proceedings of IUI-2004, Madeira, 2004.

[5] O. Stock.  Language-Based Interfaces and Their
Application for Cultural Tourism. AI Magazine,
22(1):85-97.

