Accelerating the world's research.

The virtual museum: New
perspectives for museums to present
objects and information using the
internet as a know...

li shuqiao

Proceedings of Internationalen …


Cite this paper

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Downloaded from Academia.edu 


Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of the best related papers 

CANTONE F, GRECO G, FERRARA B. Museo Narrante: The Foce Sele Hera Sanctuary 
Virtual Mu…
Francesca Cantone

Virtual museums, a survey and some issues for consideration
Fotis Liarokapis

A Museum is a Museum is a Museum Or is it ?: Exploring Museology and the Web
Lynne Teather


In: Zimmermann, Harald H.; Schramm, Volker (Hg.): Knowledge Management und
Kommunikationssysteme, Workflow Management, Multimedia, Knowledge Transfer. 
Proceedings des 6.
Internationalen Symposiums für Informationswissenschaft (ISI 1998), Prag, 3. – 
7. November 1998.

Konstanz: UVK Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, 1998. S. 185 – 200

The “Virtual Museum”¹: New Perspectives For
Museums to Present Objects and Information
Using the Internet as a Knowledge Base and
Communication System

Werner Schweibenz

University of Saarland, Germany
Mainzer Str. 129

D-66121 Saarbrücken
w.schweibenz@rz.uni-sb.de

Content

1 Introduction

2 Museums and the Mass Media

3 Museum Information and Information Technology

4 The “Virtual Museum” and the Opportunities it offers

5 THE INTERNET AS A COMMUNICATION AND KNOWLEDGE BASE FOR MUSEUMS

6 Conclusion

Abstract

The relationship between museums and mass media as well as the possible
impact of information technology on museums are described. The “virtual
museum” is defined as a means to establish access, context, and outreach by
using information technology. The Internet opens the “virtual museum” to an
interactive dialog with virtual visitors and invites them to make a virtual 
museum
experience that is related to a real museum experience. Some research is
described on how the Internet can be used as a knowledge base and trends from
surveys how museums and virtual visitors use the Internet as a communication
tool.

¹ In this paper the term virtual museum is used in quotation marks because to 
my knowledge there
exist no accepted definition and the term in itself is an oxymoron.

Dieses Dokument wird unter folgender creative commons Lizenz veröffentlicht:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/de/

185


Zusammenfassung

Die Beziehung zwischen Museen und Massenmedien wird ebenso dargestellt wie
mögliche Auswirkungen von Informationstechnik auf Museen. Das “virtuelle
Museum” wird definiert als ein Mittel, das mit Hilfe von Informationstechnik
Zugang, Kontext und Kontaktaufnahme zu Besuchern ermöglicht. Das Internet
öffnet das “virtuelle Museum” für einen interaktiven Dialog mit virtuellen 
Besuchern
und lädt sie ein, im “virtuellen Museum” Museumserfahrungen zu machen, die mit
dem realen Museum in Beziehung stehen. Es wird berichtet, wie Museen und
virtuelle Besucher das Internet als Knowledge Base und Kommunikationsmittel
benützen.

1 Introduction

Internet has become a household word. Even institutions with more conservative
attitudes towards information technology such as museums start to recognize the
possibilities it offers for the dissemination of information to a world wide 
public.
The interest in the application of interactivity and multimedia in the museum
community was stated in the International Conferences on Hypermedia and
Interactivity in Museums (ICHIM) which started in 1991. For a lot of museums the
next  step was to establish a presence on the World Wide Web and bring their
collections on the Information Highway. More and more museums are interested in
using the Internet and in sharing their experiences. This is shown in the annual
conference Museums and the Web which was established in 1997. In this situation
it    is necessary to ask what new perspectives information technology can 
offer to
museums for presenting objects and information and how the Internet can be used
as a knowledge base and communication system.

This paper intends to show some perspectives from museology and information
science literature and it also discusses the question stated above, referring
especially to the art museum. This kind of museum is of special interest because
in   the art museum the object has a status as a work of art and curators often 
think
it speaks for itself and no additional information is necessary whereas the 
public
would appreciated background information in order to understand the museum
objects. As a start it is necessary to take a look at the relationship between 
the
museum and the mass media. Researchers have found out that there exist some
interesting parallels.

2 Museums and Mass Media

Museums are institutions with a lot of facets depending on the topics they deal
with, e.g. art, culture, history or science to name just a few. Therefore a 
definition
for “museum” can only refer to the general aspects that all museums have in
common. Burcaw (1975), for example, offers ten definitions collected from 
different
authors and museum organizations. According to Burcaw (1975, pp. 9f), a
museum can be defined as a nonprofit institution that collects, preserves and
displays objects for educational or aesthetic purposes. By definition, a museum 
is


bound to physical objects. But at the same time it has the function of
communication and  dissemination of knowledge, a mission stated as early as
1846 when the Smithsonian Institution was founded “for the increase and 
diffusion
of knowledge among men” (Waidacher 1993, p. 98).

Dealing with the communicative function of the museum, some researchers think
that there are interesting parallels between museums and the mass media. Sharon
MacDonald (1996, p. 5) emphasizes that “museums clearly have much in common
with other institutions and media”. According to Roger Silverstone (1988, p. 
231),
“museums are in the communication business” and offer a display of objects and
artifacts which has been designed to educate, inform and entertain. Silverstone
(1994, p. 162) further states that “museums are in many respects like other
contemporary media. They entertain and inform; they tell stories and construct
arguments; they aim to please and to educate; they define, consciously or
unconsciously; effectively or ineffectively, an agenda; they translate the 
otherwise
unfamiliar and inaccessible into the familiar and accessible.” Relating these 
tasks
of  the museum to mass media culture of the late twentieth century Silverstone
asks what kind of medium the museum is and how museums relate to and
participate in electronically mediated culture (1994, pp. 161f). The problem in
answering this question is, according to Silverstone, that there are obvious
differences between museums and broadcast media such as newspapers, radio or
television because museums occupy physical spaces, contain objects and
encourage interactivity while they allow the visitor to wander through their 
exhibits.
This range of interaction is not available to broadcast media that can only 
mediate
between spaces but do not offer control (Silverstone 1988, p. 235).

Although there are differences in the degree of interaction between museums and
broadcast media, there are striking parallels in behavior between museum
audience and mass media audience as the research of the sociologist Heiner
Treinen (1980; 1993) shows. Treinen has identified a kind of behavior that 
people
visiting museums and people using mass media have in common. He calls it the
phenomenon of “active dozing”, a purposeless, planless activity that looks for
gaining  and  maintaining  permanent  stimulation/diversion  (1993,  p.  89).  
In
museums “active dozing” appears in the form of “cultural window shopping”, which
means that “visitors behave as if museums were mass-media: they linger in
particular in front of objects with which they have already, before the museum 
visit,
had something to do. As long as they know something about the category of
objects and thus about the structure of the display, then a few glances may 
suffice
to check off a few points, to stimulate thought, to supplement knowledge.
Everything else is simply ‘taken on board’, or treated as mere diversion” 
(Treinen
1993, p. 90). This indicates that most museum visitors do not get the full 
value out
of their visit and that museums could be more attractive to visitors if they 
would
provide  more  information  and  entertainment  or  a  combination  of  both  -
edutainment. Especially the combination of information and entertainment is
important because museums are in competition for visitors with other leisure
pursuits and mass media (MacDonald, Sharon 1996, p.1) that use information
technology extensively in order to become attractive to the audience. George
MacDonald and Stephen Alsford (1995, pp. 129f) describe how museums
compete with theme parks for recreational and leisure-time activities and how 
they


adopt certain means usually applied by theme parks to attract visitors. Their
conclusion is that there are new structures in communication and learning that
create a dynamic interplay between the two and that both will pursue their 
special
ways of presenting and interpreting information (1995, pp. 143-145).

3 Museum Information and Information Technology

In the 1980s a shift of paradigms happened in museology: the importance of
objects was questioned in favor of the importance of information (Pearce 1986).
Scholars like Wilcomb E. Washburn suggested that the emphasis of museum work
should be put on information rather than on objects (1984, pp. 14f), others like
George  MacDonald  and  Stephan  Alsford  (MacDonald/Alsford  1989,
MacDonald/Alsford 1991, Alsford 1991, MacDonald 1992) described the museum
as an information utility going as far as stating that museums need to think of
information, rather than of material objects, as their basic resource (Alsford 
1991,
p.8). Finally museums were no longer thought of as being repositories of objects
only but as “storehouses of knowledge as well as storehouses of objects”
(Cannon-Brookes 1992, p. 501; Hooper-Greenhill 1992, pp. 3f).

An important issue related to that shift of paradigms was the growing importance
of museum education and visitor studies. A number of studies on visitor 
interests
were conducted like those of Melora McDermott (1988) and the Getty Center for
Education and the Arts (1991). The findings of these reports showed that the
visitors thought information to be important for the appreciation of museum 
objects
in general and for art in particular. If they do not get this information, 
visitors lack
the key to the understanding of museum objects and they cannot connect to the
object. Therefore they behold the objects for a few seconds only (Treinen 1996, 
p.
65). As Laura Chapman states (1982, p. 48), the myth that “objects speak for
themselves” forgets that the meaning of an object is learned and established by
the context. The importance of context and how it is communicated is also
emphasized by Treinen (1996, p. 65) who reasons that communication is the key
to the understanding of the museum object. Instead of only presenting objects,
museums have to create meaning and establish context. This shows that an
important aspect of the museum is to connect visitors, objects and information, 
an
idea for which Glen H. Hoptman has introduced the term connectedness.

According to Hoptman (1992) connectedness is the basic feature of the “virtual
museum”, as it seeks to describe the interrelated and interdisciplinary 
presentation
of museum information with the help of integrated media. Connectedness is the
quality that allows the “virtual museum” to transcend the abilities of the 
traditional
museum in presenting information. This new quality can be realized in different
ways, for example, in displaying digital representations of works of art next to
comparative works by the same artist, artists who have influenced him or her, or
works of the same style or period that are exhibited in museums at various
geographic locations or that are otherwise not normally accessible together.
Hoptman's concept of connectedness coupled with the following quote shows the
value of the “virtual museum”:


The concept of the Virtual Museum demonstrates how limitations imposed by
the traditional method of organizing and presenting information can be
overcome in the context of museum visits.  In a nutshell, the Virtual Museum
provides multiple levels, perspectives, and dimensions of information about a
particular topic: it provides not only multimedia (print, visual images through
photographs, illustrations or video, and audio), but, more important, it 
provides
information that has not been filtered out through these traditional methods
(Hoptman 1992, p. 146)

Connectedness does not merely mean to link objects together but to give visitors
the opportunity to focus on their special interests by pursuing them in an
interactive dialog with the museum. This is an important step in the development
from the traditional museum to the museum of the future, as Hooper-Greenhill
(1994, pp. 134) emphasizes: the museum changes from a “collection-driven
museum” to an “audience-driven museum” that tries to relate to particular 
visitor
groups and to focus on the visitors instead of the collections they visit. Ben 
Davis
(1994, p. 70) reaches the same conclusion when he states: “The digital museum
can be visitor-centered rather than curator-centered.“

An important step towards the “audience-driven” or “visitor-centered” museum is
that museums try to reach out to their prospective visitors. The possibilities 
of
outreach that telecommunication services offer for the museum to link with its
visitors are emphasized by several researchers (Anderson 1997; Argoski 1995;
Bearman 1995a, 1995b; Bowen/Bennett/Johnson 1998; MacDonald/Alsford 1997).
For them, the Internet seems to be the ideal knowledge base and communication
system to achieve this goal. The World Wide Web offers the possibility to link 
text,
images, sound and video to an interactive hypermedia setting which promises
interesting opportunities for museums to present objects and information and 
offer
remote access to their collections. This will have a deep impact on the 
traditional
museum.  Both Maxwell L. Anderson (1997, p. 27) and George MacDonald and
Stephan Alsford (1997, pp. 267f) think that the museum will combine its role as 
a
repository with the use of telecommunication technologies adding a new, digital
dimension to the traditional museum. This digital dimension will lead to a new 
form
of museum that enriches the objects with information: the “virtual museum”.

4 The “Virtual Museum” and the Opportunities it offers

The idea of the “virtual museum” is currently under construction. In the museum
and information science literature a variety of terms are used synonymously for
museum-related digitized information resources, e.g. electronic museum, digital
museum, on-line museum, hypermedia museum, meta-museum, Web museum,
and Cyberspace museum. All these terms share the concept of digitized museum
information that is brought together in an online-accessible collection.

A well-known definition for the “virtual museum” was presented by Geoffrey Lewis
(1996, WWW) on the museum discussion list “museum-l” and in the Article Section
of Britannica Online, the Internet version of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. 
Lewis
described the “virtual museum” as


a collection of digitally recorded images, sound files, text documents, and 
other
data of historical, scientific, or cultural interest that are accessed through
electronic media. A virtual museum does not house actual objects and therefore
lacks the permanence and unique qualities of a museum in the institutional
definition of the term. (Britannica Online, Article Section, 1996)

Lewis emphasized the important difference between the traditional museum and
the “virtual museum”, i.e. the real and the digital object. Related to this is 
the lack
of unique qualities to which Walter Benjamin refers to as “aura” in his famous 
1936
essay “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction”. As the research
of M. Travis DiNicola (1995, WWW) shows Benjamin’s essay is relevant for the
digital reproduction of works of art. The heated discussion on “aura” in the
museum literature gives proof of a dispute between progressive researchers who
grant digitally reproduced objects a kind of auratic quality (DiNicola 1995, 
WWW;
Douglas Davis 1995, p. 381-385) and traditionalists (Schäfer 1995, pp. 75f;
Mitchell/Strimpel                                        1997, p. 32) who 
refuse to grant it.

This aspect may be important for the museologists and specialists but not so 
much
for the common museum visitors. The research of John Falk and Lynn Dierking
(1992 p. 2f) shows that from the visitor's perspective the museum experience
consists of three contexts: the personal context which incorporates a wide 
range of
personal experience, knowledge and motivation; the social context which refers 
to
the social environment in which the visit happens; and the physical context 
which
relates to the architecture of the building as well as to the objects contained 
within.
As Falk and Dierking (1992, p. 13f) emphasize the “decision to visit a museum
involves matching personal and social interests and desires with the anticipated
physical context and the associated activities of a museum” and that visitors 
want
to see content in context. But as stated earlier in regard to Treinen’s theory 
of
“cultural window shopping”, most museum visitors do not get the full value out 
of
their visit. In this context, the research of Falk and Dierking (1992, p. 37) 
offers an
interesting insight: the  visitor’s museum experience highly depends on
expectations of the visitor and how closely they fit to the visitor’s museum 
agenda
and the actual museum experience. If the visitor has “informed expectations”
about the museum visit, there will be a close fit between the expectations and 
the
actual visit. Eventually this will lead to a positive, reinforcing attitude 
about
museums.

All these arguments lead to the question that is crucial to the “virtual 
museum”:
“Any discussion of virtual museums must begin with the question: Is it possible 
for
the patron to have a meaningful or ‘real’ experience visiting a ‘virtual’ 
museum?”
(Argoski 1995, WWW). This question is partly answered by Falk and Dierking
(1998) and Lynne Teather (1998). Falk and Dierking (1998, p. 8f) draw parallels
between museum-going and visiting museum Web sites and suggest – based on
the modest research that is available – that creating a Web experience is as
complex a behavior for virtual visitors as museum going because both are
centered on free choice learning. Teather refers to the “user-created 
experience of
museums”, as she calls it and states (Teather 1998, p. 6) that “the essence of 
the
museum experience that we wish to transfer to the web [...] is about meaning 
and


knowledge building that is based in the visitor”. According to Teather, the 
museum
experience – both the real and the virtual one - is centered around meaning
making of the visitors, something for which they need information. But while
Teather values information, she doesn’t support “a philosophy of information for
information’s sake” (p. 8f) but a philosophy of concepts. The idea of concepts 
is
especially important because access to the information is not enough as Kevin
Donovan (1997, p. 128) points out. He argues that “access to much of our on-line
sources is of little value because museums add so little value to the data they
provide”. The object data with no value added are not useful for those who can 
not
interpret and analyze it. Therefore Donovan (1997, p. 130) suggests that
museums should give up their object-centric manner in the electronic space
because the object is only available in a surrogate form. Instead they should
present stories of the culture, historical context, people and places the 
object is
related with. This leads back to Hoptman’s concept of connectedness.

Taking all these ideas into account the “virtual museum” can be defined as 
follows:
The “virtual museum” is a logically related collection of digital objects 
composed in
a variety of media, and, because of its capacity to provide connectedness and
various points of access, it lends itself to transcending traditional methods of
communicating and interacting with the visitors being flexible toward their 
needs
and interests; it has no real place or space, its objects and the related 
information
can be disseminated all over the world.

This definition follows the research of James Andrews and Werner Schweibenz
(1998) and describes the “virtual museum” essentially as a museum without walls,
as Bearman (1992, p. 126) calls it. This “virtual museum” opens itself to an
interactive dialog with visitors offering them connected digital objects and
information that is readily accessible from outside the museum. At its best, the
“virtual museum” connects the visitors with valuable information across the 
entire
globe and gives them a dynamic, multidisciplinary and multimedia approach to the
collection as Jamie McKenzie puts it (McKenzie 1997, WWW). The idea is not a
new one, it was already described in a scenario presented by Allon Schoener
(1968, p. 364) at the 1968 Conference on Computers and their Potential
Application in Museums. Now the Internet offers the possibility to realize it.

5 The Internet as a Communication and Knowledge Base for Museums

The prerequisite for the “virtual museum” are digitized data. Therefore it is
important that museums “recognize that the methods of information processing
and delivery in the next century will be digital, and they should begin now to 
build
digital image and knowledge bases reflecting their holdings and the contexts of 
the
creation, discovery, use, and meaning” (Bearman 1992, p. 135). This is necessary
because the collection of the “virtual museum” consists of those objects only 
that
are documented in the museum’s databases and not of those held in its
storerooms, therefore undocumented or inadequately documented objects are lost
to the virtual collection as Bearman (1995a, p. 21) states. In the long run, 
Bearman
argues, the difference between having objects “on exhibit” and “on display” will
diminish and the whole collection will be accessible online all the time. The 
goal


will be, according to Argoski (1995, WWW), that the information collected by the
museum will “be reused in a variety of ways and through different media”. 
Argoski
calls this “repurposabilty” and thinks it of prime importance to the “virtual 
museum”.

The  Fine  Arts  Museums  of  San  Francisco  (FAMSF)  offer  an  interesting
perspective of how digitized museum information can be used in different 
contexts.
A huge part of the museums’ holdings are digitized in the imagebase “The
Thinker” (URL = http://www.thinker.org/imagebase/index.html) which contains over
70,000 images and related information (for details see Schweibenz 1998). The
museum staff uses the imagebase to plan exhibitions, researchers who visit the
museum use it to select works of art they want get from storage, visitors access
information on objects while visiting an exhibit, and virtual visitors visit the
imagebase on the Web. The next step is to combine the collection in “The 
Thinker”
with that of other museums in the digital library of the Art Museum Image
Consortium of which the FAMSF is a member.

The Art Museum Image Consortium (AMICO, URL = http://www.amn.org/-AMICO/)
is a consortium of 23 North American art museums that was founded in October
1997. The members plan to set up an Art Museum Image Consortium Library that
shall contain the documentation of over 20,000 works of art by the end of the 
year
1998 and be twice the size in 1999. The AMICO Library consists of multimedia
documentation of works of art, including digital images, collection data, 
curatorial
records, scholarly research and educational material. In general the images 
will be
high resolution pictures (1024 x 768 pixels in 24 bit color), some images will 
be
available in resolution up to twenty times the minimum, allowing a zooming
function. Sample records are available on the AMICO Web site. The AMICO
Library will be licensed to educational institutions (K-12, universities, 
museums,
and public libraries) and the revenue is shared by the members and used to meet
the AMICO technical specifications.

The AMICO Library can be regarded as an example for a “virtual museum” that
invites visitors to make a virtual museum experience. It fulfills the 
predictions of
Howard Besser who speculated in his 1987 article The Changing Museum (Besser
1987, p. 14) that the role of the “museum will change from a static repository 
of
information (akin to an archive) to a more dynamic, interactive information 
source
(more like a library)”, changing public perception of the objects they store.
Museums will become more accessible and more democratic as a wider public
gets involved (Besser 1987, p. 16f). Besser argues that the museum is a tightly
controlled environment has limited hours, admission fees, and an elitist way of
looking at art. But things change with the advent of information technology 
which
allows increased access and interactivity. This will shift the museum from 
being a
passive repository to a more active role. As Roland Jackson et al. (1998, p. 1)
point out, “the capacity of the Internet, synchronous and asynchronous, makes it
possible to make contact and develop long-term relationships with the public”.
Another   example   is   the   Virtual   Reference   Desk   (http://-
www.nmaa.si.edu/ref_desk.html) of the National Museum of American Art (NMAA)
where the reference librarian answers questions from researchers and laymen
from all over the U.S. The virtual reference desk was intended as a facet of
interactive features which included online chats, message boards, entertaining


contents, suggestion boxes and the digital reference service. These features 
were
thought as a means to interact with the audience in order to find out what 
museum
services they most wanted, as Joan Stahl, the reference librarian of the NMAA,
puts it (Stahl 1998, p. 11). The electric reference service is well accepted as 
the
average of approximately 350 questions per month shows, the users range from
students to artists and professionals both inside and outside the art fields 
(p. 11f).

Other ways of using the Internet as a means of communication are described by
Jonathan P. Bowen, Jim Bennett, Jim and James Johnson (1998, WWW) who did
some research in how museums have been using the Internet and how they could
use it in the future. They sum up several reasons why museums should use the
Internet:

•  Maintaining a presence on the Internet provides the potential for 
worldwide
publicity.

•  The Internet offers fast and convenient communication with both 
colleagues
and the public.

•  Virtual exhibitions can mirror and keep up actual exhibitions in 
the galleries.
This                                          is what around three quarters of 
virtual visitors expect to find at museum
Web sites. Moreover virtual exhibitions allow access to material that is
otherwise not available.

•  The Internet offers an alternative, cheap, and complementary form of
information provision and is likely to act as a draw for prospective visitors 
who
would like to see the real thing.

•  The Internet offers remote access to scholarly research of collections in 
online
databases.

The research of Bowen, Bennett and Johnson shows that the Internet can be a
useful tool for communication with the audience. But there is only little 
research
available both on how museums and virtual visitors use the World Wide Web.

Stephanie James (1997, WWW) has done a survey on how museums use their
Web site which included 33 museums around the world. For 30 percent the
rationale behind the creation of the Web site was promotion/marketing, for 19
percent to have a presence on the Web, and for 11 percent it was educational
reasons. Over times the purpose has evolved with 73 percent of the participating
museums and shifted away from the promotion/marketing emphasis. Now for 38
percent the emphasis is now greater access to collections, for 23 percent 
greater
educational focus, for 15 percent increasing interactivity. At the same time 54
percent of the participating do no web-visitor research at all and 14 percent 
do hit
counting. Only 23 percent investigate the length of visit and the pages looked 
at.
This shows that there is still a lot of research to do for museum and 
information
science professionals.

While visitor studies are an emerging discipline in the Anglo-American museum
world, research on virtual visitors is still a comparatively new field. 
Katherine
Futers (1997, WWW) presents the data of a survey conducted by Rachel
Reynolds, a museum studies student at the Leicester University. According to 
this
survey 88 percent of the virtual visitors are based in North America, women make
up 46 percent of them and the average age of museum web page visitors is 40 to
64 years of age. 74 percent of the virtual visitors expect to find online 
exhibition on


museum Web pages, 87 percent expect images and 52 percent want to download
these images – a nightmare for most museums’ copyright concerns. Currently a
survey of a student of the University College London is going on (International
Internet Museum Survey Questionnaire http://geocities.com/SoHo/Museum/8355/).
How virtual visitors use the World Wide Web and what they expect to find there
will hopefully soon become an evolving field for visitor studies.

These survey data can only indicate trends but they give hints how the World 
Wide
Web can evolve to a communication system between museums and visitors.
These data are supported by the hit counts of Web catalogs that offer access to
museum Web sites. An example is the site Museums around the world of the
International  Council  of  Museums  (http://-www.icom.org/vlmp/world.html)
respectively the Virtual Library of museums page (http://www.comlab.ox.ac.uk/-
archive/other/museums/) both maintained by Jonathan P. Bowen. Bowen has
counted more than 2.5 million visitors since the sites were established. Bowen’s
statistics (Bowen 1995, p. 38f) show that museum information on the Web is on
the par with American Football. This means that museums on the Web are doing
reasonably well as far as the numbers of visitors are concerned.

6 Conclusion

The use of telecommunication technologies offers interesting perspectives for
museums and the opportunity to add a new, digital dimension to the traditional
museum, thereby creating a “virtual museum”. The foundations for the “virtual
museum” are already laid. Bearman (1995b, pp. 15f) estimates that by the end of
this decade over 20 million original objects will have been digitized. In this 
way,
museums and the digital information they offer will become loadstones of content
for the growing multimedia industry and for museum initiatives for outreach to 
the
public (Bearman 1995a, p. 12). As some statistics and research suggest, the
public looks for and appreciates museum information on the Internet but has high
standards that the museums have to meet. The Internet is a great opportunity
which the museums should use to broaden its audience. So there is a piece of
advice for museums concerning the Web: “Be there or be square!”


References

Alsford (1991)

Alsford, Stephen. Museums as Hypermedia: Interactivity on a museum-wide
scale. Hypermedia & interactivity in museums: proceedings of an international
conference. Ed. David Bearman. Pittsburgh, PA: Archives and Museums
Informatics,                                     1991. 7-16

Art Museum Image Consortium

Art Museum Image Consortium (AMICO). Internet, URL = http://www.amn.org/-
AMICO/.                                     Version: undated. Last visited: 
08/30/1998

Anderson (1997)

Anderson, Maxwell L. Introduction. The Wired Museum- Emerging Technology
and Changing Paradigms. Ed. Katherine Jones-Garmil. Washington, D.C.:
American Association of Museums, 1997. 11-34

Andrews/Schweibenz (1998)

Andrews, James/Schweibenz, Werner. A New Media for Old Masters: The
Kress Study Collection Virtual Museum Project. Art Documentation 17(1), 1998.
19-27

Argoski (1995)

Argoski, Jason. Virtual Museums: The Web Experience. The Virtual Mirror.
Internet,  URL  =  http://www.vmirror.com/rov-int/museums.html.  Version:
12/17/1995. Last visited: 07/29/1998

Bearman (1995a)

Bearman,  David.  Information  Strategies  and  Structures  For  Electronic
Museums. Ed. Museum Documentation Association (Great Britain): Information:
The Hidden Resource, Museums and the Internet. 7th Conference 1995
Edinburgh,  Scotland.  Cambridge,  England:  Museum  Documentation
Association, 1995. 5-22

Bearman (1995b)

Bearman, David. Museum Strategies for Success on the Internet. Ed. Giskin
Day: Museum Collections and the Information Highway. Proceedings of a
Conference on Museums and the Internet 10 May 1995. London: Science
Museum, 1995. 15-27

Bearman (1992)

Bearman, David. Interactive Multimedia in Museums. Eds. Susan Stone and
Michael Buckland, Michael: Studies in Multimedia: State-of-the-Art Solutions in
Multimedia and Hypermedia. Proceedings of the 1991 Mid-Year Meeting of the
American Society for Information Science San Jose, California, April 1991.
Medford, NJ: Learned Information, 1992. 121-137

Benjamin (1985)

Benjamin, Walter. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.
Illuminations. Walter Benjamin - Essays and Reflections. Ed. Hannah Arendt.
New York, NY: Schocken Books, 1985. 217-51

Besser (1987)

Besser, Howard. The Changing Museum. Information: The Transformation of
Society. ASIS’87 Proceedings of the 50ᵗʰ Annual Meeting of the American
Society for Information Science, Boston, MA, October 4-8, 1987. Ed. Chen,
Ching-chih. Vol. 24. Medford, NJ: Learned Information, 1987. 14-19


Bowen (1995)

Bowen, Jonathan. The Virtual Library of Museums. Ed. Giskin Day: Museum
Collections and the Information Highway. Proceedings of a Conference on
Museums and the Internet 10 May 1995. London: Science Museum, 37-39.

Bowen/Bennett/Johnson (1998)

Bowen, Jonathan P./Bennett, Jim/Johnson, James. Virtual Visits to Virtual
Museums. Internet, URL = http://www.museums.reading.ac.uk/mw98/paper/.
Version: April 1998. Last visited: 07/28/1998

Britannica Online (1998)

Britannica  Online,  Articles  of  the  Year,  1996.  Internet,  URL  =
http://www.eb.co.uk:195. Version: undated. Last visited: 05/08/1998

Burcaw (1975)

Burcaw, George Ellis. Introduction to Museum Work. Nashville, TN: American
Association for State and Local History, 1975

Cannon-Brookes (1992)

Cannon-Brookes, Peter. The Nature of Museum Collections. Manual of
Curatorship, 2nd. ed. Ed. J. Thompson. London: Butterworth, 1992. 500-512

Chapman (1982)

Chapman, Laura. The Future and Museum Education. Museum News,
July/August 1982. 48-56

Davis, Ben (1994)

Davis, Ben. Digital Museums. Aperture. No. 136 Summer, 1994. 68-70
Davis, Douglas (1995)

Davis, Douglas. The Work of Art in the Age of Digital Reproduction. Leonardo
(USA),                                            28(5), 1995. 381-386

DiNicola (1995)

DiNicola, M. Travis. The Work of Walter Benjamin in the Age of Digital
Reproduction.  Internet,  URL  =  http://cac.psu.edu/~mtd120/palmer/thesis/
benjamin.html. Version: 11/04/1995. Last visited: 07/27/1998

Donovan (1997)

Donovan, Kevin. The Best of Intentions: Public Access, the Web and the
Evolution of Museum Automation. Ed. David Bearman and Jennifer Trant:
Museums and the Web 1997: Selected Papers. Proceedings of the First
International  Conference  Los  Angeles,  California,  March  16-19,  1997.
Pittsburgh, PA: Archives & Museum Informatics, 1997. 127-133

Falk/Dierking (1992)

Falk, John H./Dierking, Lynn D. The Museum Experience. Washington:
Whalesback Books.

Falk/Dierking (1998)

Falk, John H./Dierking, Lynn D. Understanding Free-Choice Learning: A Review
of the Research and its Application to Museum Web Sites. Ed. David Bearman
and Jennifer Trant: Museums and the Web 1998: Selected Papers published on
CD-ROM. Proceedings of the Second International Conference 1998 Toronto,
Canada, April 22-25, 1998. Pittsburgh, PA: Archives & Museum Informatics,
1998. Pages counted as printed.


Futers (1997)

Katherine Futers. Tell Me What You Want, What You Really, Really Want: A
Look at Internet User Needs. Proceedings of EVA’97 Paris, France. Internet,
URL = http://www.open.gov.uk/mdocassn/eva_kf.htm.  Version: 1997. Last
visited: 08/30/1998

Getty (1991)

Getty Center for Education and the Arts. Insights, Museums, Visitors, Attitudes,
Expectations, A Focus Group Experiment. Los Angeles, CA: The Paul Getty
Trust, 1991

Hooper-Greenhill (1992)

Hooper-Greenhill, Eilean. Museums and the Shaping of Knowledge. The
Heritage: Care-Preservation–Management. London: Routledge, 1992

Hooper-Greenhill (1994)

Hooper-Greenhill,  Eilean.  Museum  education:  past,  present  and  future.
Towards the Museum of the Future. New European Perspectives. Ed. Roger
Miles and Lauro Zavala. London/New York: Routledge, 1994. 133-146

Hoptman (1992)

Hoptman, Glen H. The Virtual Museum and Related Epistemological Concerns.
Ed. Edward Barrett: Sociomedia. Multimedia, Hypermedia and the Social
Construction of Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT-Press, 1992. 141-159

Jackson et al. (1998)

Jackson, Roland/Bazley, Martin/Patten, Dave/King, Martin. Using the Web to
Change the Relation Between a Museum and its Users. Ed. David Bearman
and Jennifer Trant: Museums and the Web 1998: Selected Papers published on
CD-ROM. Proceedings of the Second International Conference Toronto,
Canada, April 22-25, 1998. Pittsburgh, PA: Archives & Museum Informatics,
1998. Pages counted as printed.

James (1997)

James, Stephanie. Museum Web Page Survey Results. Internet, URL =
http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~sjames/museum/survey.htm.       Version:
03/05/1997. Last visited: 08/18/1998

Lewis (1996)

Lewis, Geoffrey. The Response of Museums to the Web. Archives of MUSEUM-
L@HOME.EASE.LSOFT.COM  Museum  discussion  list.  Internet,  URL  =
http://home.dc.lsoft.com/archives/museum-l.html.  Posted:  10/17/1996.  Last
visited: 07/01/1998

MacDonald, George (1992)

MacDonald, George. Change and Challenge: Museums in the Information
Society. Ed. I. Karp: Museums and Communications - The Politics of Public
Culture.                                       Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian 
Institution Press, 1992. 158-181

MacDonald, Sharon (1996)

MacDonald, Sharon. Theorizing Museums: An Introduction. Ed. Sharon
MacDonald, Sharon and Gordon Fyfe: Theorizing Museums. Oxford: Blackwell.
1-18


MacDonald/Alsford (1997)

MacDonald, George/Alsford, Stephen. Conclusion: Toward the Meta-Museum.
Ed. Katherine Jones-Garmil: The Wired Museum - Emerging Technology and
Changing Paradigms. Washington, D.C.: American Association of Museums,
1997. 267-278

MacDonald/Alsford (1995)

MacDonald, George/Alsford Stephen. Museums and Theme Parks: Worlds in
Collision? International Journal on Museum Management and Curatorship, Vol.
14 No. 2, 1995. 129-147

MacDonald/Alsford (1991)

MacDonald, George/Alsford, Stephen. The Museum as Information Utility.

Museum Management and Curatorship, 10/1991. 305-311
MacDonald/Alsford (1989)

MacDonald, George/Alsford, Stephen. A Museum For The Global Village. The
Canadian Museum of Civilization. Hull: Canadian Museum of Civilization, 1989.
See Chapters 6 The Museum as Communicator, 10 The Museum as Resource.

McDermott (1988)

McDermott,  Melora.  Through  Their  Eyes:  What  Novices  Value  in  Art
Experiences.   Annual  Meeting  Sourcebook.  Washington,  DC:  American
Association of Museums, 1988. 135-162

McKenzie (1997)

McKenzie, Jamie. Building a Virtual Museums Community. Paper presented at
the Museums & The Web Conference March 16-19, 1997 Los Angeles,
California.  Internet,  URL  =  http://fromnowon.org/museum/museweb.html.
Version: March 1997. Last visited: 08/28/1998

Mitchell/Stripel (1997)

Mitchell, William J./Strimpel, Oliver B. R. To Be There Or Not To Be

There: Presence, Telepresence and the Future of Museums. Museum News.
Mar/Apr. 1997. 31-32 and 58-59

Pearce (1986)

Pearce, Susan M. Thinking about Things. Approaches to the Study of Artefacts.

Museum Journal, March 1986. 198-201

Schäfer (1995)

Schäfer, Hermann. Use and Embedding of Interactive Media in a Museum of
Contemporary History. Ed. David Bearman: Hands On Hypermedia and
Interactivity  in  Museums.  Selected  Papers  form  the  Third  International
Conference on Hypermedia and Interactivity in Museums (ICHIM ‘95 - MCN ‘95)
San Diego, California October 9-13, 1995. Pittsburgh, PA.: Archives & Museum
Informatics, 1995. 70-85

Schoener (1968)

Schoener, Allon. The Electronic Museum and Information Distribution. Ed.
Metropolitan Museum of Art: Computers and Their Potential Applications in
Museums. A Conference Sponsored by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, April
15, 16, 17, 1968. New York, NY: Arno Press, 1968. 359 – 366

Schweibenz (1998, forthcoming)

Schweibenz,  Werner.  Museumsinformation  im  Internet  am  Beispiel  der
Webseiten  zweier  Kunstmuseen  in  den  USA.  Ed.  Marlies  Ockenfeld.
Proceedings des 50. Deutschen Dokumentartags. Frankfurt/M.: DGD, 1998.


Silverstone (1994)

Silverstone, Roger. The Medium is the Museum. Ed. Roger Miles and Lauro
Zavala: Towards the Museum of the Future. New European Perspectives.
London/New York: Routledge, 1994. 161-176

Silverstone (1988)

Silverstone, Roger. Museums and the Media: A Theoretical and Methodological
Exploration. International Journal of Museum Management and Curatorship,
Vol.                                                 7, No. 3, 1988. 231-241

Stahl (1998)

Stahl, Joan. “Have a question? Click Here”: Electronic Reference at the
National Museum of American Art. Art Documentation 17(1) 1998. 10-12

Teather (1998)

Teather, Lynne. A Museum is a Museum is a Museum ... Or Is it?: Exploring
Museology and the Web. Ed. David Bearman and Jennifer Trant: Museums and
the Web 1998: Selected Papers published on CD-ROM. Proceedings of the
Second  International  Conference  Toronto,  Canada,  April  22-25  1998.
Pittsburgh, PA: Archives & Museum Informatics, 1998. Pages counted as
printed.

Treinen (1996)

Treinen, Heiner. Ausstellungen und Kommunikationstheorie. Ed. Haus der
Geschichte: Museen und ihre Besucher – Herausforderungen in der Zukunft.
(Reihe Museumsfragen) Berlin: Argon Verlag. 60-71

Treinen (1993)

Treinen, Heiner. What Does The Visitor Want Form A Museum? Mass-media
Aspects Of Museology. Ed. Bicknell, Sandra/Farmelo, Graham: Museum Visitor
Studies in the 90s. London: Science Museum. 86-93

Treinen (1980)

Treinen, Heiner. Das Museum als Massenmedium – Besucherstrukturen,
Besucherinteressen   und   Museumsgestaltung.   Ed.   CECA/ICOM:
Museumsarchitektur für den Besucher, 1980. 13-32

Waidacher (1993)

Waidacher, Friedrich. Handbuch der Allgemeinen Museologie. Mimundus Bd. 3.
Wien: Böhlau, 1993

Washburn (1984)

Washburn, Wilcomb E. Collecting Information, Not Objects. Museum News, 62
February, 1984. 5-15

