A Personalized Walk through

the Museum: The CHIP Interactive
Tour Guide


Ivo Roes

Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
i.roes@student.tue.nl

Natalia Stash

Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
n.stash@tue.nl

Yiwen Wang

Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
y.wang@tue.nl

Lora Aroyo

VU University Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
l.m.aroyo@cs.vu.nl

Abstract

More and more museums aim at enhancing their
visitors' museum experiences in a personalized,
intensive  and engaging way inside the museum. The
CHIP¹ (Cultural Heritage Information Personalization)
project offers various online and mobile tools to the
users  to be their own curators, e.g. browsing the online
collections, planning personalized museum tours,
getting recommendations about interesting artworks to
see, and quickly finding their ways in the museum. In
this paper we present the new version of the
personalized museum guide² offered on a mobile device
in    the physical museum space. We maintain a dynamic
user model to ensure high relevance of recommended
artworks and museum tours and in this way (1) support
personalized interaction both online and in the museum
and   (2) provide an intuitive bridge between the online
and on-site experiences. We apply semantic Web
technologies to enrich the museum collection and
guarantee serendipity, novelty and relevance of the
recommendations.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).

CHI 2009, April 4 – 9, 2009, Boston, Massachusetts, USA    


ACM 978-1-60558-247-4/09/04.

¹ http://chip-project.org

² http://www.chip-project.org/demo/mobileguide/



Keywords

Interactive museum tours, mobile museum guide,
semantic web, recommender systems, user modeling

ACM Classification Keywords

H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation

Introduction

The CHIP (Cultural heritage Information Presentation)
project is a cross-disciplinary research project,
combining aspects from cultural heritage and
information technologies. The team has been working
at    the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam since early 2005, as
part of the CATCH (Continuous Access to Cultural
Heritage) program. We explore interactive and
engaging  ways to (i) acquire visitors' interests of the
museum collection, (ii) to personalized museum
services   on the Web site and in the real museum space,
as well as (iii) to link visitors' experiences online and in
the museum. In this context, we follow a user-centered
approach to develop a set of technical solutions for
semantically enriching the Rijksmuseum digital
collection    and for interactive distributed user modeling
used  for content-based recommendation techniques.

We have performed a series of empirical user studies
[1,2,3] to derive requirements for building the tools
and  to access the quality of the personalization
provided by them. In this paper, we focus on describing
the design and development of a mobile museum guide
providing a personalized navigation to museum visitors.
For description of the other CHIP tools see [4].

Personalized Museum Guides

We have identified four types of museum tours: (i)
human-guided tours, (ii) audio tours, (iii) online/virtual
tours, and (iv) multimedia tours [5]. In recent years,

mobile technology provides various opportunities for
multimedia tours to help visitors to enhance the
museum experiences [6]. Personalization in museum
guides could enable visitors to achieve more enjoyment
as well as greater knowledge and excitement during the
tour [7], e.g. for example the MIT Media Lab audio and
visual narration adapting to the user's interest acquired
from the physical path in the museum and length of the
user stops [8]; or the PEACH PDA-based location-aware
museum tour [9] adapting the museum content to the
visitor's interests and location. Further, the INTRIGUE
guide recommends sightseeing destinations by taking
into account the preferences of heterogeneous tourist
groups [10]. In CHIP we personalize the selection of
artworks for the museum visitor based on (1) their
underlying semantic relations, e.g. related styles,
artists, themes, or locations and (2) the strength of the
user interest in those semantically enriched properties.
We identify a number of recommendation patterns,
which prove to deliver most relevant and serendipitous
suggestions for artworks to the users.

Linking the visitor's experiences online and on-site into
one cycle supports a continuous learning experience,
helps retaining memories over time, enables to pursue
individual interests, and allows the visitor to focus on
experimentation, discovery and the aesthetic
experience during a museum visit. Several museums,

e.g. Tate Modern, Science Museum Boston, already
explored the potential of bridging the Web and the
physical museum spaces. However, the bottleneck
appears  to be in the actual combining of the user data
from both spaces. All CHIP tools use a common
distributed user model, which is continuously updated
with  the ongoing user interactions both on the Web and
the mobile platforms.



Usage Scenario

Imagine the following usage scenario: Before a
museum visit, based on the recommendations provided
by  the CHIP Artwork Recommender, our user creates
online a tour of Rijksmuseum artworks that match her
art interests and are currently available in the museum.
In the museum, with the help of the CHIP mobile guide,
our user can follow the same tour she created online.

During the visit, the tour is dynamically adapted with
related artworks to the explicit interests and
preferences  the user indicates. The navigation path, the
length  of the tour and the number of offered artworks
are also adapted accordingly. During the visit, the
mobile guide interactions are dynamically synchronized
with the user profiles maintained on the CHIP website.

CHIP Personalization Tools

To support this usage scenario we have developed
three tools: Online Art Recommender, Online Tour
Wizard (online demo at: http://chip-project.org/demo)
and Mobile Museum Guide (demo: http://chip-
project.org/demo/mobileguide).

•  The online Art Recommender (fig. 1) helps
users to discover their art interests in the
museum collection and to store them in a
corresponding user profile.

•  The online Tour Wizard generates online
museum tours (presented on a museum map
in   fig. 2 and in a historical timeline in fig. 3)
containing recommended artworks according to
the user's interests.

figure 1. CHIP online Art Recommender. The interface
contains                           four main interaction parts: (top left) 
artworks
sequence, (top right) rated topics, (bottom left) recommended
artworks, and (bottom right) recommended topics (http://chip-
project.org/demo/).

figure 2. CHIP online Tour Wizard (map). The interface
contains two main interaction parts: (left) two floors of the
museum                        map, (right) list of tours for the user 
(including all
artworks in each tour). Indicating an artwork in the tour list
locates its position on the floor maps and the other way



around, indicating a thumbnail of an artwork on the map
highlights in the list of tours (http://chip-project.org/demo/).

•  The mobile Museum Guide offers the tours
created online, provides extensive description
of each artwork, as well as a set of related
artworks to the ones included in the tour or
any  given one in the museum. The users can
dynamically adapt their tours by expressing in
terms  of ratings preferences in some seen
artworks, or by indicating a desired tour length
or number of artworks to be included in the
tour.

CHIP Architecture

Figure 5 depicts the client-server architecture with Java
Servlets running on the CHIP server, described
elsewhere in details [15, 16]. The collection data refers
to the enriched museum collections, currently the
Rijksmuseum ARIA database, maintained in a Sesame
Open RDF memory store and queried with SeRQL. The
user data contains OWL user models and tour data. The
Web-based demo components are realized as Java
Servlets and JSP pages with CSS and JavaScript. The
mobile guide is implemented as a Web application
running via a Web browser on different mobile devices
(e.g. smart phones, iPhone, iPod)


figure 3. CHIP online Tour Wizard (timeline). The interface
contains two main interaction parts: (left) timeline with
thumbnails                           of the artworks in the tour, (right) list 
of tours for
the user (including all artworks in each tour). Indicating an
artwork in the tour list locates its position on the timeline and
the other way around, indicating a thumbnail of an artwork on
the timeline highlights in the list of tours (http://chip-
project.org/demo/).

figure 4. CHIP mobile Museum Guide, (from left to right): (a)
tour selection and configuration screen; (b) tour sequence; (c)
related artworks. An online demo is available at:
http://www.chip-project.org/demo/mobileguide/

Mobile Museum Guide

An important aspect of the mobile museum guide is the
various types of adaptation we can provide to cater
different context and user aspects (e.g. location,



temporal preferences, art interests). Typically we
perform three main actions for realizing these adaptive
steps: (1) filter out from the tour artworks that do not
satisfy the current constraints; (2) add artworks to the
tour that qualify according to contextual and user
criteria; (3) re-order artworks in an optimal navigation
sequence (e.g. to fit the room configuration and user
position). The contextual and user constraints we
collect   both implicitly (e.g. monitoring user position and
time spent per artwork) and explicitly (e.g. user
ratings, indicate the maximum number of artworks the
user wants to see in a tour or the maximum amount of
time the user wants to spend in the museum). We
identify two levels of adaptation when following a tour
and when configuring a tour.

At a tour configuration level we can: (1) adapt the
number of artworks to see in a tour based on the
maximum length of the tour (in minutes) explicitly
given   by the user. Similarly, we also can (2) adapt the
time to be spent in a tour based on the maximum
number of paintings the user is interested to see in one
tour. The user can change those adaptation parameters
at any point during the usage of the mobile guide (e.g.
before starting a tour, while following a tour).

Additionally, at this level, any predefined Rijksmuseum
tour could be adapted to the art interests stored in the
individual user profiles. This adaptation could also be
applied on tours shared with friends. For example, one
user can adapt to the own interests a tour that a friend
has shared with him; or a tour shared between two
friends can be adapted to match their both profiles
together. In other words, this means either (1)
including   in the tour only artworks that are liked by
both users (above a certain threshold), or (2) making
detours of the tour for each user and include meeting

points. This would allow them to follow the same tour
together in a museum and still see items, which fit their
individual differences.

figure 5. CHIP Architecture.

At the level of following the tour adaptation is possible
when the user indicates interest in a given artwork. In
this case, a set of related artworks are offered, and
potentially included in the tour. This would result in
adding  the selected artworks to the tour, re-ordering
the current tour to fit the new spatial constraints and
filtering out artworks in order to meet temporal or



number restrictions given by the user at a configuration
level. The artworks in each tour are ranked according
to their level of interest to the user. To find related
artworks we use semantic relations between them, e.g.
semantic relations between their properties. For
examples, related artworks to a self-portrait of
Rembrandt would be other portraits and self-portraits
and  male portraits by Rembrandt, male portraits by
students of Rembrandt, male portraits or self-portraits
by other artists in the same style.

Discussion and Future Work

Following a user-centered design method, we have
performed a number of user studies [1,2] to test the
effectiveness of the recommendations and the overall
usability  of the Art Recommender. The results proved
that the system helps users, especially novice users, to
quickly elicit their art interests in the museum
collection  and it recommends artworks suiting different
user’s preferences. Based on these initial results as a
next step, we plan to test the usability and efficiency of
the Tour Wizard and Mobile Museum Guide with real
visitors in a constructed museum scenario.

Acknowledgements

The work on the CHIP project is funded by the Dutch
Science Foundation CATCH program and is in
collaboration with the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam.

References

[1] Wang, Y., L. Aroyo, N. Stash, and L. Rutledge.
2007. Interactive User Modeling for Personalized Access
to Museum Collections: The Rijksmuseum Case

Study. Proc. of the User Modeling conference (UM'07).

[2] Wang, Y., N. Stash, L. Aroyo, P. Gorgels, L.
Rutledge, and G. Schreiber. 2008. Recommendations

Based on Semantically-enriched Museum Collections.
JWS: Semantic Web Challenge 6 (4): 43-50.

[3] H. Cramer, V. Evers, S. Ramlal, M. van Someren, L.
Rutledge, N. Stash, L. Aroyo and B. Wielinga: The
Effects of Transparency on Trust in and Acceptance of a
Content-based Art Recommender. UMUAI 18:5, 2008.

[4] Aroyo, L., N. Stash, Y. Wang, Gorgels P., and L.
Rutledge. 2007. CHIP Demonstrator: Semantics driven
Recommendations and Museum Tour Generation. Proc.
of the Int. Semantic Web Conference (ISWC'07).

[5] Wang, Y., R. van Sambeek, Y. Schuurmans, L.
Aroyo, N. Stash, L. Rutledge, and P. Gorgels. 2008. Be
Your Own Curator with the CHIP Tour Wizard. Proc. of
Museums and the Web (MW'08).

[6] Anderson, Paul, and Adam Blackwood. 2004. Mobile
and PDA technologies and their future use in education.
Proc. of JISC Technology and Standards Watch.

[7] Bowen, J. P., and S. Filippini-Fantoni. 2004.
Personalization and the web from a museum
perspective.    Proc. of Museums and the Web conference

[8] Sparacino, Flavia. 2002. The Museum Wearable.
Proc. of Museums and the Web (MW'02).

[9] Rocchi, C., O. Stock, M. Zancanaro, M. Kruppa, and

A. Kruger. 2004. The Museum Visit: Generating
Seamless Personalized Presentations on Multiple
Devices. Proc. of IUI’04

[10] Ardissono, Goy, Petrone, Segnan, Torasso. 2003.
INTRIGUE: Personalized recommendation of tourist
attractions for desktop and handset devices. Journal of
Applied Artificial Intelligence 17 (8): 687-714.

