Modeling Visitors’ Profiles: A Study to Investigate
Adaptation Aspects for Museum Learning Technologies

ANGELIKI ANTONIOU and GEORGE LEPOURAS, University of Peloponnese

The time restrictions that apply in museum learning increase the need for 
adaptive and/or adaptable technologies. However,
deriving a visitor’s profile is not an easy task, since most common ways 
(asking direct questions, recording user actions) are
either intrusive or time consuming. Observing the visitors’ movement (visiting 
style) within the museum could provide valuable
information regarding adaptivity. In the present study, issues of visiting 
style were explored and statistical significance was
found once different factors were analyzed. Most importantly, there seems to be 
a connection between the way people move in
a museum and the way they prefer to approach and process information 
cognitively. Environmental factors that can affect the
expression of visiting style were also identified.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine 
Systems—Human factors; human informa-
tion processing; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User 
Interfaces—User-centered design; prototyping; K.3.1
[Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education—Computer-assisted 
instruction

General Terms: Design, Human Factors                                            
     7

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Adaptability, adaptivity, museum adaptive 
learning technologies, education, design guide-

lines, museum

ACM Reference Format:

Antoniou, A. and Lepouras, G. 2010. Modeling visitors’ profiles: A study to 
investigate adaptation aspects for museum learning
technologies. ACM J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 3, 2, Article 7 (September 2010), 19 
pages.

DOI = 10.1145/1841317.1841322 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1841317.1841322

1. INTRODUCTION

During the past years museums have moved from preserving and displaying 
artifacts to institutions
focused on the education and entertainment of visitors [Falk et al. 1997; Kelly 
2000]. To this end,
museum curators strive to design and implement exhibitions that offer an 
educational and at the same
time enjoyable experience. However, designing such an exhibition is not an easy 
task. The exhibition
has to cater to the needs of different types of visitors and the selection of 
the most prominent learning
technologies is further restricted by two important issues: (1) most visitors 
might only visit once and

(2) a typical museum visit only lasts for a few minutes [Falk et al. 1985; 
Serrell 1998]. The provision of
a personalized experience to the visitor may help alleviate the problem of 
limited time and may more
generally enhance the experience of any visitor if properly customized.

Author’s address: A. Antoniou (corresponding author), G. Lepouras, University 
of Peloponnese, Tripolis, Greece; email:
angelant@uop.gr.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided
that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and 
that copies show this notice on the first page
or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to
lists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be
requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New 
York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax 1 (212) 869-0481,
or permissions@acm.org.

c 2010 ACM 1556-4673/2010/09-ART7 $10.00

DOI 10.1145/1841317.1841322 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1841317.1841322


However, unlike other learning systems, the time limitations imply that in a 
museum one cannot
obtain the necessary information by asking direct questions to the visitor or 
by recording and postan-
alyzing user actions on a given device interface (i.e., on a PDA) [Papanikolaou 
and Grigoriadou 2005].
At this point it is important to make a distinction between the different terms 
used to describe
the different levels and aspects of adaptation. Adaptation is a general term to 
describe the ability
of a computer system to adapt to the requirements of its environment or the 
needs of the users. In
the latter case, when the system adapts to user needs, the process is known as 
personalization. The
users of adaptive systems can have different levels of control of the system’s 
adaptive features. For
example, when the user has full control of the system’s adaptive features and 
can select between
different available options, then this system is described as adaptable. When 
the system adapts to
perceived user requirements without informing the user, it is known as a fully 
adaptive system. In a
hypothetical continuum with different levels of user control, the amount of 
user control can vary in

different systems from full control to no control.

Furthermore, the use of personalized interfaces for adaptive applications has 
been criticized mainly
regarding the amount of control provided to different users [Papanikolaou et 
al. 2001], since problems
could derive from different levels of control allowed, either too little or too 
much. For example, full
control and many available options could confuse the user. In addition, certain 
features on nonadaptive
systems seem to increase time effectiveness of use [Findlater and McGrenere 
2004]. Nevertheless,
users tend to prefer adaptive applications [Findlater and McGrenere 2004], even 
though they may not
customize them in optimal ways [Bunt et al. 2004]. Effective adaptivity seems 
to be dependent on the
nature of the task, as well as on the users’ individual characteristics 
[Graziola et al. 2005; Li et al. 2009]
and available features [McGrenere et al. 2007], implying that adaptive systems 
can be significantly
improved to accommodate different user preferences and needs. Since the 
different factors that might
affect the effectiveness of adaptivity are not fully explored, the field 
requires further research. There
seems to be a need for personality-aware interfaces. There are indications that 
when the adaptivity
parameters match the different personality and cognitive characteristics of the 
individual, learning
becomes significantly more effective both in regards to application features 
and content [Caporusso
2009].

Furthermore, in regards to learning, adaptive technology can be a valuable tool 
[Gaeta et al. 2009]

supporting different types of learning, like collaborative [Gweon et al. 2006] 
and museum learning
[Wakkary and Hatala 2007]. From all the preceding, we can conclude that 
although there are certain
limitations with the use of personalized interfaces, mostly in regards to 
interface design, the design
of museum learning technologies could benefit from their use. Not only the 
increasing complexity of
the available technologies but also the multidimensional learning content of 
museums make adaptiv-
ity issues relevant, in an attempt to cover diverse learning needs [Muntean and 
Muntean 2009]. We
therefore aim at solutions that will use salient cues to lead to adaptivity 
without the users’ awareness
or explicit action. Consequently, all information counts whether it is provided 
by the user intentionally
or unintentionally.

Museums around the world are using adaptive technologies for a variety of 
purposes. There are
applications that provide customized information for different target groups 
[Terrenghi and Zimmer-
mann 2004; Walczak et al. 2006], for example, according to visitors’ age 
[Alzua-Sorzabal et al. 2005].
There are also applications that attempt to match different visitors with 
similar interests [Sumi and
Mase 2002]. Different applications can also use different technologies. For 
instance, certain applica-
tions provide adaptive information over the Web [De Bra et al. 2002]. In 
addition, there are applications
that adapt to the specific learning needs of the individual, like INSPIRE, a 
hypermedia system devel-
oped in order to adapt to the knowledge levels and learning style of the 
learners [Papanikolaou et al.
2002].


Fig. 1. The Cicero guide from Dini et al. [2007].

Furthermore, museums worldwide use a variety of not simply adaptive but also 
mobile applications.
More specifically, a wide range of mobile and space-sensitive devices exist 
that provide museum vis-
itors with adaptive content [Crowley and Knutson 2002; Hall and Bannon 2006; 
Jacucci et al. 2009;
Leinhardt et al. 2002; Rocchi et al. 2004; Raptis et al. 2005] for individual 
and collaborative learning
[Dini  et al. 2007; Huizenga et al. 2009; McGreen and Sanchez 2005; Schroyen et 
al. 2008]. Adaptivity in
these cases relied on different environmental cues. The following screen shots 
illustrate the interface
of the Cicero guide, as an example of museum-adaptive and mobile applications.

Another good example is the PEACH (Personal Experience with Active Cultural 
Heritage) project,
in which mobile devices were also used. This particular project is worth 
mentioning due to its special
design, using cinematic techniques in order to create a feeling of personalized 
TV. The documentary-
like content also adapted to the interests of the user [Rocchi et al. 2004]. In 
addition, the PIL (PEACH-
Israel) project attempted mobile adaptation for groups of visitors, since 
rarely people visit museums
alone [Kuflik et al. 2007]. In this article, we discuss the implications of 
visiting style and cognitive
style for instructional design based on 335 questionnaires.

1.1 Visiting Style

The way people behave in a museum can provide valuable information for the 
design of adaptive tech-
nologies. Perhaps the easiest observation and the least intrusive is to record 
the way people move in
the physical space of a museum. Anthropological research by Veron and Levasseur 
[1983] has identi-
fied four dominant types of museum movement. Animal metaphors were used to 
describe the different
visitors. An Ant visitor moves in a linear fashion, approaches almost all 
exhibits, is interested in detail,
avoids empty spaces and follows a clear path and the curators’ suggestions. A 
Fish visitor moves in
the center of rooms, trying to see the “larger” picture, does not approach most 
exhibits and does not
stop very frequently. A Butterfly visitor moves in a nonlinear fashion and does 
not pay attention to the
curators’ suggestions, changes the direction of her movement often, approaches 
exhibits, is interested
in detail, sees almost all exhibits, and is affected by environmental 
affordances (the exhibit’s accessi-
bility, visitor traffic, etc.) [Gabrielli et al. 1999; Marti et al. 2001]. 
Finally, a Grasshopper visitor is a
person of particular interests and only approaches certain items, crosses empty 
spaces, and spends a
significant amount of time in front of these exhibits.

Visiting style has a strong situational component and implies that different 
environmental issues

affect its expression. As discussed earlier, different environmental factors, 
that is, visitor traffic, can
prohibit the expression of certain visiting styles (Ants) and enhance others 
(Butterflies). Important
environmental issues that seem to affect visiting style are: the width of the 
artworks, their positions,
their artistic importance, access points to a room, arches, steps, crowds, 
lights, etc. [Marti et al. 2001].


In the present study, environmental issues are further explored, including 
issues of museum size.
There is a possibility that the size of a museum could affect the expression of 
the visiting styles.
For example, in a large museum visitors cannot simply see all or most exhibits, 
therefore, we expect
fewer Ant and Butterfly visitors. Similarly, in a small museum, the number of 
Fish and Grasshopper
visitors might be limited. In our study, we have also included another 
situational factor, the type of
visitor. By the term “type of visitor,” we refer to different visitors that 
visit either alone or in a group
(family, school, friends, and tourists). The type of visitor could 
significantly affect visiting style. Finally,
questions on museum type were also introduced, with the thought that there 
might be differences in
the proportions and expressions of visiting style in museums of different 
thematic material.

A few applications are already using visiting style in order to provide the 
visitors of cultural her-
itage sites with personalized information. An example of such systems is HIPS 
(Hyper-Interaction
within Physical Space), a hypermedia system supporting mobile presentation of 
museum and histor-
ical information. Tourists and museum visitors are equipped with a hand-held 
device which provides
electronic tours. Tourists’ positions are detected and auditory information is 
personalized and context
depended [Broadbent and Marti 1997]. The main principle of the application is 
that information is
context depended and thus, it should be presented in different ways [Petrelli 
et al. 1999a]. The envi-
ronment becomes an interface and the visitor’s movements become a form of input 
to the system. The
system can spot a novice visitor from her movements and support her during the 
visit. HIPS assumes
that different visiting styles need different durations for the presentations 
and the empirical data
supports this hypothesis [Gabrielli et al. 1999]. HIPS uses infrared emitters 
to connect to the users’
devices (PDAs) [Marti et al. 2001]. Finally, user testing and evaluation showed 
that all users like the
idea of receiving information related to their movement. In addition, in the 
experimental cases where
the visiting style was matched to appropriate content, the users demonstrated 
increased interest by
requesting more information about the exhibits explicitly [Marti et al. 2001].

The use of applications that adapt to visitors’ visiting style [Broadbent and 
Marti 1997; Gabrielli
et al. 1999; Petrelli et al. 1999b] was found effective in terms of solving 
navigation problems in physical
[Oppermann et al. 1999; Specht and Oppermann 1999] and virtual museums 
[Chittaro and Ieronutti
2004],  as well as increasing visitor satisfaction and learning motivation 
[Marti et al. 2001]. However, it
was also found that visiting style should be combined with other 
considerations, notably the taxonomy
of the artworks, the physical location of exhibits, and the visitors’ interests 
[Oppermann and Specht
2000].

1.2 Cognitive Style

Aiming especially at learning technologies, it was important to study issues 
relevant to human learn-
ing. One important factor was cognitive style, a relatively constant and 
situation-independent charac-
teristic that describes the cognitive processes involved in learning. Cognitive 
style shows how people
prefer to approach and process information [Riding and Rayner 1998]. This is a 
well-studied field [Ford
1995; Hudson 1966; Kagan 1965; Liu and Reed 1995; Pask 1972; Riding and Cheema, 
1991; Witkin,
1962, 1978] and it has been connected to the design of effective learning 
technologies [Atkins et al.
2001]. A list of guidelines for the accommodation of all cognitive styles in 
the design of adaptable
learning technologies is also available from previous research [Lawrence 1997; 
Martin 1997].

Systems developed so far using visiting style were based on observations in 
order to match content.
For example, Chittaro and Ieronutti suggest that “long and detailed 
presentations are more suitable
for an [A]nt visitor, while short presentations are more suitable for 
[G]rasshopper visitors” [Chittaro
and Ieronutti 2004, p. 46]. Empirical data confirms the hypothesis of a 
correspondence between vis-
iting style and different contents [Gabrielli et al. 1999], showing a clear 
potential for efficient learn-
ing. Furthermore, Umiker-Sebeok [1994] made a first attempt to combine visiting 
and cognitive style.


However, the small sample size (N=41) did not permit elicitation of significant 
results. Nonetheless,
there were clear indications that there might be a connection between the two.

1.3 Assessment Tools

Depending on the different aspects of the cognitive style researchers wish to 
study, various assess-
ment tools have been designed and employed. Probably the most well-known and 
cited are the CSA
(Cognitive Style Analysis) [Riding and Rayner 1998] and the MBTI (Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator)
[Briggs-Myers and McCaulley 1985]. The MBTI uses self-reported questionnaires 
and is based on
Jung’s theory of psychological types. Participants are described using four 
dimensions: extraversion-
introversion, sensing-intuition, thinking-feeling, and judging-perceiving. The 
combination of the four
dimensions offers 16 personality types. Having a strong validity and 
reliability while being easy to
complete and including questions on user control, the MBTI was selected for use 
in this study.

In recent years, there has been an ongoing debate about whether to use adaptive 
or adaptable sys-
tems in education. A very important reason for using MBTI was the fact that it 
includes questions
on user control. The main question was whether it is better for the user to 
interact with an adaptive
system or whether it is better that the system permits user control and 
provides customization choices
to the user. The issues of user control are very important for the design of 
educational technologies.
Kettanurak et al. [2001] found that accommodators as described in Kolb’s 
learning styles [Kolb 1985]
appreciated the control given to them and a high interactivity mode, whereas 
divergers did not like
the  high user control condition. By specifying participants’ control 
preferences we will then be able to
see the possible connections to the other variables like visiting style.

2. METHOD

A variety of methods exist for the collection of visitor data. These methods 
include interviews with
the museum visitors, observing their movement inside the museum, as well as 
using questionnaires to
reveal visitor-related information. In this study, the latter method of 
questionnaire survey was used. It
is important to note that all available methods have certain strengths and 
weaknesses associated with
their use, as well as a number of financial, practical, and ethical 
considerations [Bitgood 1988; 2002].

Questionnaires were chosen since they do not interfere with the visit, like 
observations might do,
and they also allow statistical analysis and stronger generalization than 
interviews [Petrelli et al.
1999b]. Considering the trade-off between practicality, cost, and ethics on the 
one hand and reliability
and validity on the other, as well as taking into account the nature of the 
required research, a deci-
sion was made in favor of the questionnaires’ use. This decision is also in 
line with previous findings
from the Smithsonian Institution indicating that similarities in results 
outweigh the differences be-
tween the methods when different practical and ethical issues are considered 
[Doering and Pekarik
1998]. In addition, the present study is a front-end informative research. 
According to the Wells and
Butler Visitor-Centered Evaluation Hierarchy, which matches research goals to 
appropriate methods,
different research goals require different data collection methods and in this 
front-end study the use
of questionnaires can provide valid results [Doering 2006; Wells and Butler 
2002].

Although questionnaires are not directly related to the movement patterns of 
the visitors, but rather
report the participants’ perception of their own behavior, they were still 
considered appropriate for the
purposes of this study due to a number of reasons. Firstly, there are certain 
limitations regarding direct
observation of visitors which mainly pertain to ethical and legal reasons.

Secondly, questionnaires were also found appropriate due to the specific 
character of the present
research. Certain questions can produce more accurate results than others. 
Previous research has
indicated that self-reports on physical movement provide more accurate results 
than self-reports on the
time spent [Bitgood and Richardson 1986; Iguchi 2006]. In this study, requiring 
simple answers on the


linearity or nonlinearity of one’s movement, and not detailed descriptions 
regarding visiting behavior,
allowed participants to describe their actual movement styles, and ensured that 
the questionnaires
reflected this information accurately.

Reliability was also indirectly checked in the questionnaires. The 
questionnaires included a hy-
pothetical question of how visitors usually move in museums of different sizes. 
Their answers were
compared to their description of their actual movement in the museums they had 
just visited, together
with their estimation of this museum’s size. This comparison showed that 
visitors reported similar
movement patterns in both physical and hypothetical settings.

Furthermore, certain types of questions are more prone to providing biased 
answers than other types
[Parry and Crossley 1950]. These questions usually include an emotional 
element. To comply with the
literature findings on the subject and acquire as indicative answers as 
possible, the types of questions
used  in this study were carefully chosen and phrased, using comprehensive 
language and emotionally
neutral, nonsuggestive questions.

Proper question design, according to the steps described before, ensured the 
best possible reliability
of the survey in terms of acquiring answers that reflected actual visitor 
behavior in the gallery. Apart
from that, reliability and validity also had to be ensured in terms of properly 
acquiring the data. To this
end, the “Code of Ethics for Museums” has been followed in this study, not 
simply by taking into ac-
count ethical considerations but also by attempting to increase the validity of 
the responses [Museums
Association 2009]. Following museum-ethics guidelines, data was collected on 
the visitors’ way out, in
a   quiet space away from the exhibits. Questionnaires were also anonymous and 
were distributed to
more than one participant at the time (the investigator would not know which 
questionnaire corre-
sponded to which individual). The participants were also left to complete the 
questions alone, away
from the presence of the researcher. In the questionnaire, participants could 
provide their email for a
follow-up process; however, it was made clear that they could decline that 
option. Participants were
also informed about their right to refuse to answer questions. Finally, 
following the code of ethics, par-
ticipants were informed about the solely academic purposes of the study, were 
given the contact details
of  the researcher and the institution, and had the option to receive an email 
with further information
about the study and its results.

To assure internal consistency reliability, the questionnaires were distributed 
for a whole week (in-
cluding weekends) and during all opening hours of different museums (museums of 
different size and
thematic content), in an attempt to minimize the risk of getting specific types 
of visitors (for example,
schools visiting in the mornings of week days, etc.). Moreover, the visitors 
considered in this study
were not predetermined, but this study rather used the actual population that 
visited the museum for
a specific time span, following a simple, random sampling procedure. In 
addition, not all individuals
chose to participate in the study. As a consequence, these limitations may have 
caused certain biases
in the sample used. Considering these biases, certain measures were taken to 
increase the external
validity of the survey to the best possible extent [Petrelli et al. 1999b]. 
These measures pertain to the
use of a large sample (335 fully completed questionnaires), as well as using a 
heterogeneous population
(male and female participants of different ages from 35 countries).

The study is divided into the analyses of primary questions like those 
presented in this section,

concerning mostly visiting style, and the analyses of secondary questions that 
mainly concern issues
of cognitive style. The secondary significant findings are only explained in 
the Results section due to
space limitations.

2.1 Visiting Style and Museum Size

The present research wishes to study a number of issues relevant to visiting 
style, whose role has not
been clear from previous studies. One of them is the issue of museum size, how 
this is determined,


what factors affect the perception of size and how this affects, or not, 
visiting style. The size of a
museum and the perception of its size to the visitors could be determined by a 
number of factors.
Perhaps the most important are the number of square meters, the number of 
rooms, and the number
of exhibits and/or the combination of them. Together with asking direct 
questions about museum’s
size factors, we also wished to compare the perceived size with the visiting 
style expressed. Therefore,
it was hypothesized that people’s visiting styles are affected by museum size. 
The null hypothesis
(Hn) was: There will be the same proportion of visiting styles that could be 
observed in museums of
different sizes. The Hn is formed in such a way since we suppose that in small 
museums most visitors
could be either Ants or Butterflies and in large museums most visitors could be 
either Grasshoppers or
Fish.

2.2 Visiting Style and Type of Visitor

Visiting style and type of visitor could significantly affect visiting style. 
For example, the different
visiting styles can only emerge when the visitor is alone. By the term type of 
visitor, we describe the
number of people visiting together and the type of group they form. We have 
identified five different
types of visitors: people visiting alone, families, groups of friends/ peers, 
schools, and tourist groups.
Null hypothesis: People’s visiting style is not affected by the type of visitor 
they belong to. Hn1: all four
visiting styles will emerge equally (in similar proportions) for individuals 
and groups.

2.3 Visiting Style and Museum Type

Hypothesizing that there might be a relation between museum type and visiting 
style, the null hy-
pothesis was formed as follows: Visiting style will not be affected by museum 
type.

2.4 Visiting Style and Cognitive Style

Finding a correlation between the two variables could imply a solution to the 
problem of adaptivity
in museums, since the observable visiting style could provide valuable 
information about the internal,
nonobservable cognitive style and presentation preferences of the different 
visitors. Thus, the null
hypothesis was: There will be no significant correlation between the different 
visiting styles and the
cognitive styles of visitors.

2.5 Visiting Style and User Control

For issues of adaptivity, it is important to know the amount of control the 
user wishes to have. In the
questionnaire, there were questions to investigate issues of user control. The 
null hypothesis is: there
will be no statistical correlation between the different visiting styles and 
the amount of user control
the visitors wish to have.

2.6 Visiting Style and Demographic Factors

Different demographic factors like age, nationality, and gender are correlated 
to visiting style that
could have adaptivity implications. The null hypothesis was that visiting style 
would be independent
of demographic factors.

The questionnaire was distributed to different museums, but the main bulk of 
data came from the
National Archaeological Museum (Athens, Greece). The distribution of 
questionnaires at the National
Archaeological Museum lasted for one week during spring 2008. The study factors 
were identified from
a pilot study at the University of Athens, History Museum [Antoniou and 
Lepouras 2006]. Therefore,
the questionnaire included questions on museum size (how visitors view the 
specific museums and
what are the factors that determine a museum’s size), questions on the type of 
visitor (whether they
visited alone or in a group), questions on visiting style, questions for the 
elicitation of cognitive style


(the MBTI test), and questions for collecting demographic information. Visitors 
completed the ques-
tionnaires on their way out of the museum. In total, 335 questionnaires were 
gathered. All the data
were categorical (nominal) and chi-square tests were used for the statistical 
analyses. A questionnaire
template is available to interested readers at 
[http://hci-vr.cst.uop.gr/museum-quest.pdf].

2.7 Variables

The analysis of data concentrated around 12 main variables, in order to 
investigate possible relation-
ships.

—Age (four possible values: under 21, 22–45, 46–65, over 66);

—Gender (two possible values: Female, Male);

—Nationality;

—Museum size (three possible values: small, medium, large);

—Museum size factors (seven possible values: number of rooms, square meters, 
number of exhibits,
quality of artifacts, density of exhibits, number of highlights, time spent, 
museum architecture.
These categories emerged from the pilot study);

—Visiting style (four possible values: Ant, Fish, Grasshopper, Butterfly);

—Type of visitor (five possible values: alone, school, tourist group, peers, 
family);

—Behavior with others, only for group visitors (four possible values: exhibits 
important to me, exhibits
important to the group, exhibits important to all of us, exhibits important to 
some since we split up);

—Museum type (name of the different museum where the study took place);

—Museum content (three possible values: In an industrial museum I would like to 
learn about prin-
ciples of engineering, industrial aesthetics, industrial history. The 
Industrial museum was chosen
since it is not a common museum type and therefore not associated with specific 
learning stereo-
types).

—Cognitive style (16 possible values, based on the Myers and Briggs Type 
Indicator);

—User control (three possible values: prefers control, prefers instructions, 
neutral).

It should be noted here that more variables could have been included, like 
domain expertise, previous
visits, etc. For example, a visitor with specific interests and domain 
expertise would probably spend
more time in front of specific exhibits or would probably desire in-depth 
information. In addition, a
distinction between local and nonlocal visitors might also be very important, 
since there are different
learning needs for people that might only visit once than other visitors than 
have the option of repeated
visits. However, more variables were not included, in the interests of keeping 
the questionnaire short,
to avoid participants’ fatigue. Nevertheless, different descriptive variables 
are also very important and
should be investigated in future works. The field could be further explored and 
would possibly provide
very interesting findings.

3. RESULTS

All the variables described earlier were nominal/categorical. These nominal 
data, with multiple cate-
gorical values, formed several contingency tables. The contingency tables were 
statistically analyzed
with chi-square tests. From the available chi-square tests, the Pearson’s 
chi-square test was used in or-
der to test the goodness of fit of the observed frequency distribution against 
the theoretical distribution
and also to test the independence of the variables. Although the Pearson’s test 
is the best known and
most widely used for the analysis of contingency tables, there are several 
problems associated with its
use when the expected frequencies are low. For those cases when the expected 
frequencies were low, a
more appropriate test was used, the Likelihood Ratio.


Table I. Percentage of Visiting Styles in Museums of Different
Sizes

Small Museum  Medium Museum  Large Museum
Ant        57.9%      40.9%      24.2%

Butterfly      23.3%       29.3%       19.1%

Fish         6.9%       10.7%       16.4%

Grasshopper     7.5%       13.7%       35.2%

45

40

35

30

25                                   grasshopper

20                                   ﬁsh

15                                   bu erﬂy

10                                   ant

5

0

Fig. 2. Visiting and cognitive style.

3.1 Primary Findings

3.1.1  Visiting Style and Museum Size. It was found that the most important 
size factors were
number of exhibits (60.7%) and number of square meters (22.1%). Furthermore, 
the null hypothesis
that museum size would not affect visiting style was rejected,  ²(6, 318)  
Pearson .004, Likelihood
Ratio .002, p < .05. Table I shows how visiting styles change according to 
museum size.

3.1.2 Visiting Style and Type of Visitor. We failed to reject the null 
hypothesis related to the type
of visitor and visiting style, since ² (12, 308)  Pearson .227, p > .05. 
However, it seemed that most
people in groups would see exhibits important to everyone in the group (34.3%) 
(“I saw exhibits impor-
tant to me” – 19.7%, “exhibits important to some since the group split up” – 
9%, “exhibits important to
the rest of the group” – 5.1%).

3.1.3 Visiting Style and Museum Type. We also failed to reject the null 
hypothesis concerning visit-
ing style and museum type. However, this could be due to the small sample size 
coming from museums
other than the National Archaeological Museum (National Archaeological N = 295, 
other museums
N = 23). The value of chi-square was ×2 (18, 318) = Pearson .406, p > .05.

3.1.4 Visiting Style and Cognitive Style. The null hypothesis was that visiting 
style would be inde-
pendent of cognitive style. The chi-square test allowed us to reject this null 
hypothesis since ×2 (48,
271)   = Pearson chi-square .093, Likelihood Ratio .020, p < .05. Figure 2 
shows the relations.     F


Further analysis of the data on the different axes of the MBTI revealed that 
the ×2 values are par-
ticularly significant once related to introverts-extroverts and 
judgers-perceivers ×2 (3, 299) = Pearson

.018, p < .05 and ×2 (3,271) = Pearson .018, p < .05 respectively.

3.1.5 Visiting Style and User Control. We failed to reject the null hypothesis 
related to visiting
style and the amount of user control visitors wish to have. The value of 
chi-square was ² (6, 283)
Pearson .162, p > .05.

3.1.6 Visiting Style and Demographic Factors. Once comparing visiting style to 
different demo-
graphic variables like age and gender the comparisons gave statistically 
nonsignificant results with
p  > .05. Although visiting style seems independent of age and gender, it was 
observed that visiting
style might be culturally dependent. The sample used in this study did not 
allow in-depth statistical
analysis. However, there are indications towards this direction that require 
further study.

3.2 Secondary Findings

In this section, only the significant secondary findings are reported. These 
findings could be useful in
the process of adapting the museum content to visitors of different profiles.

3.2.1 Cognitive Style and Museum Content. We failed to reject the hypothesis 
that people of dif-
ferent cognitive type would not have different preferences on museum content. 
In order to investigate
this issue, we included a question about what people would like to learn in an 
industrial museum.
The options presented to the participants were: (1) I would like to learn 
principles of engineering; (2)
I would like to learn about industrial aesthetics; (3) I would like to learn 
industrial history. The chi-
square test did not reveal statistically significant differences between the 
different cognitive types [×2
(30, 244) = Pearson .171, p > .05]. However, a closer look showed that on the 
judger-perceiver axis
there were significant values ×2 (2, 244) = Pearson .055, Likelihood Ratio 
.041, p < .05.

3.2.2 Cognitive Style and Control Provided. The null hypothesis that cognitive 
style and amount
of wanted control would be independent of each other was also rejected, since ² 
(30, 287)  Pearson

.034, Likelihood Ratio .008, p < .05.

3.2.3  Age and Different Factors. Statistically significant results were also 
found when age was
studied. In particular, the cognitive style shows significant values once 
correlated to the different age
groups,  ² (48, 287)  Pearson .085, Likelihood Ratio .047, p < .05. Especially 
the axis judger-perceiver
seems to be affected with  ² (3, 287)  Pearson .027, Likelihood Ratio .021, p < 
.05. Similarly, the
different age groups are highly correlated to the different visitor types, that 
is, whether someone visits
alone or in a certain group. ×2 (12, 294) = Pearson .000, Likelihood Ratio 
.000, p < .001. Finally, the
value of ×2 was also significant for age and nationality a not surprising 
finding, since traveling is
affected by the age of people. ×2 (102, 304) = Pearson .141, Likelihood Ratio 
.034, p < .001.

4. DISCUSSION

4.1 Primary Findings

4.1.1 Visiting Style and Museum Size. It was found that visiting style is 
indeed affected by the
size of the museum. As suspected, in a small- and a medium-sized museum most 
visitors are Ants,
whereas in large museums most visitors show Grasshopper behavior. Therefore, 
using visiting style
for adaptation purposes is also very important in regard to museum size. In 
addition, what seems to
determine the size of a museum is primarily the number of exhibits with the 
number of square meters
secondary. For example, most participants regarded the British Museum and the 
Louvre as examples
of  large museums, while most visitors viewed the National Archaeological 
Museum as medium-sized


(51.6%). To provide a brief description of this museum in terms of these size 
factors, the Greek Na-
tional Archaeological Museum covers an area of 8,000 square meters and contains 
more than 20,000
exhibits. Therefore, knowing the size of a museum, the design of learning 
technology, and the learn-
ing content can shift from supporting storytelling in small museums to provide 
detailed information
for certain highlights in large museums. However, in the present study the 
participants answered
hypothetical questions on the way they would behave in a small, a medium, and a 
large museum
regarding their visiting style. Although the analysis of the answers showed 
that the proportions of
visiting styles found in the National Archaeological Museum (a medium-sized 
museum) matched the
answers in the hypothetical questions regarding visiting style in medium-sized 
museums, thus provid-
ing validity to the method, the need for further investigation remains. 
Avoiding the use of hypothet-
ical questions, a future study should compare results on visiting style between 
museums of different
size.

4.1.2 Visiting Style and Type of Visitor. Since the value of chi-square was 
high, it did not allow
for the rejection of the Hn. This implies that there is not statistical 
difference between the different
types of visitors and the proportion of visiting styles within these groups. As 
suspected, that indicates
that visiting style research is only valid for individuals visiting museums 
alone. Once in a group, the
visiting style cannot emerge, since the group behavior has unique visiting 
characteristics that require
separate research. In general, it was found that group members come to a 
compromise between their
individual needs and try to cover the interests of all group members. 
Similarly, not many groups split
up, which shows the increased need for collaborative technologies in museums.

4.1.3 Visiting Style and Museum Type. As mentioned earlier, the statistical 
analysis did not reveal
any significant difference between the different museum types. Although we 
found no significant re-
sults, nevertheless, there is an interesting observation. Previous studies 
reported that from the total
population of visitors approximately 20% are Fish, 30% Ants, 50% Butterflies 
and 10% Grasshoppers
[Oppermann and Specht, 2000]. However, our analysis showed that the visiting 
groups were quite dif-
ferent  and the visitors could be described as 10.4% Fish, 41.2% Ants, 28.7% 
Butterflies, and 14.6%
Grasshoppers. These differences are probably related to the museum type the 
data was gathered
from,    or some characteristics of the participants like their nationality. 
Issues of museum type seem
still unclear and need further investigation. It would be interesting to see 
whether the distribution
of the visiting styles changes in museums of different thematic content. The 
small sample size com-
ing from museums other than the National Archaeological did not allow the 
further analysis at this
point.

4.1.4 Visiting Style and Cognitive Style. The cognitive styles found with MBTI 
can be easily con-
nected to specific learning content appropriate for the different learners. 
Since cognitive style describes
and reflects the specific cognitive processes that the learner uses in order to 
process information, it can
therefore be employed as an indication of learners’ preferences for the 
presentation and the content
of  the learning material. The significant values of chi-square found indicate 
that different visiting
styles correlate with particular cognitive styles. For example, it was found 
that Grasshoppers have
significantly higher chances of being judgers and introverts, whereas Butterfly 
visitors show increased
extroversion. These findings together with the finding for an increased need 
for adaptable and not
fully adaptive technologies (discussed shortly) suggest that all visitors 
should be presented with dif-
ferent options of the learning material that provide them with choice. However, 
previous research on
cognitive styles [Durling et al. 1996] shows that extroverts prefer group 
activities, while introverts
prefer to work alone. This implies that in a museum, Butterfly visitors could 
be presented with the
choice of a group activity (i.e., perhaps with other Butterfly visitors). In 
the same way, a group activity


is probably not desired by Grasshopper visitors, since they show an increased 
introversion. For these
cases, the presentation order for the different activities could change. That 
means that all visiting
style users are presented with all the options but in a manner that is closer 
to their cognitive style,
bringing the expected best-fit activity first in the presentation order. 
Similarly, judgers want structured
and organized learning material, while perceivers want to have a flexible 
learning environment. Since
Grasshoppers were found to be significantly more judgers than perceivers, the 
option of a structured
lesson should be given first on the interface of a given device (i.e., PDA) 
than a list of different learning
options.

Previous research has also made suggestions about different ways to observe and 
place visitors in
different visiting style groups. One possibility is that visitors can be 
provided with museum devices
like PDAs (i.e., HIPS). There were also suggestions for the use of visitors’ 
mobile phones and Bluetooth
technology in an attempt to reduce museum expenses [Antoniou and Lepouras 
2005].

4.1.5 Visiting Style and User Control. Questions about the amount of control 
users wanted to have
over the technology given to them were also included in the questionnaire. The 
insignificant results
found in the chi-square test do not imply a connection between visiting style 
and the amount of con-
trol visitors wish to have on a given device. That means that people of 
different visiting styles do not
show a specific preference over adaptivity (full adaptation) or adaptability 
(option of adaptive content
controlled by the user) of the learning content. The results revealed that 
device and content control
preferences are related to cognitive style that is a deeper personality 
characteristic and relatively in-
dependent of the learning situation. As will be described shortly the knowledge 
of a learner’s cognitive
style can show preferences of adaptivity or adaptability, which is something we 
cannot see from vis-
iting style alone. However, the results indicate that the majority of 
participants, regardless of their
visiting style, want to be able to control the museum content and do not want 
full adaptation. It was
found that 20.3% want the technology they use to be fully adapted to their 
needs and to guide them
through the museum. 36.4% wanted to be able to control a given device and did 
not want full adap-
tivity. 31.3% were neutral and would not mind either case. Based on these 
findings, we will argue for
the need for adaptable and not fully adaptive technologies. The design of 
learning technologies for mu-
seum use should provide the visitors with adaptability options that keep the 
user informed of system
actions.

4.1.6 Visiting Style and Demographic Factors. Although visiting style seems 
independent of age
and gender, it was observed that visiting style might be culturally dependent. 
The sample used in this
study did not allow in-depth statistical analysis. However, there are 
indications towards this direction
that require further study. This certainly imposes significant implications for 
the design of exhibitions
and the presentation order for museums in different countries. For example, a 
preference in nonlinear
information was observed in participants from northern European countries, like 
Norway, Denmark,
and  UK. At the same time, participants from Greece and USA showed a preference 
in linear infor-
mation. The content of learning and/or edutaining applications for museums 
should follow the same
rationale.

4.2 Secondary Findings

The statistical analysis found a number of significant correlations between 
variables that were not in
the initial intentions of this study to investigate. However, the findings are 
important and could be
directly used in the design of educational technologies. Although in a museum 
the visitor might only
visit once, implying that finding visitors’ cognitive style is rather 
problematic, in other learning tech-
nologies planned for repeated uses, this is not an obstacle. For example, for 
other learning technologies
the learners’ cognitive style could be easily assessed with a small 
questionnaire the very first time


that she uses the application. For those cases, all the following findings 
could be valuable. Neverthe-
less, these secondary findings are also connected to this study, since they 
provide a clearer picture on
issues related to museum learning.

4.2.1 Cognitive Style and Museum Content. High correlations were found when the 
judger-perceiver
axis was compared to museum content. Museum and learning preferences not only 
in the presenta-
tion order but about the content itself seem to be influenced by the cognitive 
style of the visitor. For
example, judgers seem to be interested in the aesthetics of things. Before 
technology was introduced in
museums, the visitors saw the thematic and exhibition approach of the curators, 
that is, whether they
wished to primarily demonstrate the functionality, the aesthetics, or the 
history of items. For example,
an archaeological museum can choose to focus on the aesthetics of the ancient 
objects, or their func-
tionality in the everyday life of the ancestors or the history of their 
discovery, etc. Technology provides
the opportunity for the presentation of different aspects of the items in 
parallel, allowing the visitor to
choose the one that is closer to her interests. The present study showed that 
visitors of different cog-
nitive styles have significantly different preferences when it comes to museum 
content. These findings
could have clear pedagogical implications, since it is not only important how 
educational material is
presented but also what is presented to different visitors can increase visitor 
satisfaction, motivation,
and learning outcomes. Technology can provide the necessary flexibility across 
presentation styles and
multiple contents. Clearly, the issue requires further investigation and will 
be addressed in our future
works.

4.2.2 Cognitive Style and User Control. In the cases that the cognitive style 
is known, the question
of adaptive versus adaptable solutions is easily tackled. The findings of this 
study showed a clear con-
nection between cognitive style and amount of control desired by the user. For 
example, mainly ESFJs
(MBTI personality type), but also ESTPs, ISTJs, and ESFPs want support while 
using technology. On
the contrary, ENFJs, ENTJs, ENTPs, ENFPs, INTPs, INFPs, ISTPs, INFJs, ESTJs, 
and INTJs want to
control the devices.¹ In the first case, adaptive devices are recommended, 
while in the second case users
will be most comfortable with adaptable technology. Therefore, it seems that 
the question of adaptive
versus adaptable learning technology is by large situation dependent. As also 
mentioned earlier, the
results of the present work imply that adaptable technologies are more 
appropriate for museum use,
since the majority of visitors wanted to control the content presented to them.

4.2.3 Cognitive Style and Nationality. The significant results found once 
nationality was compared
to cognitive style, suggest important implications for the design of 
educational technology between dif-
ferent national groups. In addition, the findings from the total participant 
population of this study
did not differ greatly from previous studies on the percentage of cognitive 
styles in the general public
[Durling 1986]. However, once the different national groups were examined 
separately, distinct charac-
teristics were revealed. For example, although the INFP is popular type for the 
American participants
(10.2%), it only represents 2.5% of the Greek sample population. In the same 
way, it is surprising to
see that 22.6% of the British participants show characteristics of the ISFJ 
type, whereas only 6.3%
of the Greek and 6.8% of the American participants belong to this category. The 
sample size used is

1A short description of the personality types is presented to assist the 
reader. The initials at the styles stand for different axes
in the MBTI. “E” stands for high extraversion (an interest in the outer world). 
“I” stands for high introversion (an increased
interest of the person in the inner world). “S” represents people that rely on 
information coming from the senses, whereas “N”
represents intuition and people that look for patterns in the information they 
perceive. Thinkers (T) prefer concrete facts and
Feelers (F) are more interested in peoples’ feelings and concerns. Finally, “J” 
stands for judging and it represents individuals
that prefer a structured lifestyle, whereas “P” stands for perceiving and 
people that prefer a flexible lifestyle (The Myers and
Briggs Foundation).


not adequate for drawing any further conclusions in this direction. However, 
these results indicate a
tendency and require further testing.

4.2.4 Age and Different Factors. Although cognitive style is a relatively 
constant personality char-
acteristic, it seems to change with age. For example, we found more young 
people in certain cognitive
styles, like ENTP and older people in other cognitive styles like INTJ. The 
representation of the differ-
ent age groups was very diverse in the various cognitive types. A further 
analysis of the data revealed
that the MBTI dimension that was mostly affected was the judger-perceiver. 
While many people are
perceivers in a young age, it seems that the numbers decrease with age, and 
then the majority of older
people are judgers. The implication for the design of (museum) learning 
technologies are important
since judgers want structured, planned, and organized learning material, 
whereas perceivers perform
better while flexible, with opportunities for exploratory learning. In 
addition, life-long learning ap-
plications can consider these findings. The number of mature learners increases 
with the growing
needs for life-long learning even within the premises of modern museums 
[Antoniou and Lepouras
2008].

Furthermore, older people are not only likely to have a certain cognitive 
style, but it was also found

that they are group visitors. Old people seldom visit museums alone. In the 
older visitors group we
placed the ages over 66. The significant results found in the comparison of age 
to visitor type impose
propositions for the design of collaborative learning activities for museums. 
Since older people are
likely to travel and visit in groups of friends, families, or tourist groups 
and at the same time they
have increased needs for structured presentation of learning content, 
collaborative activities for groups
should provide the option of structured presentation and not only exploratory 
activities. Finally, the
significant value of chi-square in the comparison between age and nationality 
is both expected and
difficult to use for the design of learning technologies for museums. Although 
it is beyond the scope of
the present work, it is not surprising that, for example, no elderly visitors 
from Australia were found
in a Greek museum. Travel factors together with possible cultural differences 
do not allow the drawing
of conclusions from these findings. Nevertheless, the issue could be worth 
further investigation for the
design of other learning technologies. In different cultures, older people 
might have a different degree
of participation in learning and/or cultural activities.

5. CONCLUSIONS

Based on the previously described findings, we could divide learning 
technologies applications into
those intended for single-episode learning, like the one usually taking place 
in museums and in those
intended for multiepisode learning where there are repeated uses of the 
learning technology. In the
latter cases, a short questionnaire can reveal the cognitive style of the 
learner during the first use,
together with other factors that affect learning like age, cultural background, 
etc. The identification
of  the cognitive style provides additional information about the user’s 
learning interests and preferred
content, as well as the amount of the control she wishes to have on the device. 
Since certain cognitive
styles demand more support, adaptivity is recommended in these cases. However, 
for cognitive styles
that want to control the device and the presentation philosophy of the learning 
content, adaptability
is advised. Especially considering the case of online environments, the 
findings of the present study
imply that there are possibilities for the delivery of targeted learning 
material to the user. An online
learning environment, including online museums, is available for multiple 
visits, during which the
user can engage in learning activities at their own time and pace. Furthermore, 
while visiting an
online environment the user can be easily monitored or even probed to create a 
more detailed profile.
This can be coupled with the findings of this study to further enhance the 
learning experience and
provide a better-targeted content.


On the other hand, technologies for single-episode museum learning need to 
provide options for
multiple learning contents to accommodate the interests of the different 
visiting and cognitive styles.
The solutions should also be adaptable and not fully adaptive. Although these 
findings seem to apply
to most museums, visiting style only seems to emerge in medium-sized museums 
and only for people
visiting alone. Only when those two conditions apply can visiting style emerge. 
Furthermore, large mu-
seums require a nonlinear structure of the learning and museum content. There 
should also be options
for providing the visitor with increased information on certain exhibits and 
especially highlights. In a
small-sized museum, there should be options for the presentation of information 
both in a horizontal
manner (i.e., storytelling) and a vertical manner (i.e., details for specific 
exhibits).

In order to better comprehend the complex results of this study, the following 
scenarios were devel-
oped.

1st Scenario: Learning Application for a Small-Size Museum. The technology 
provides option of
adaptability. That means that the user is provided with a choice of the 
learning material. The material
is designed in a way that accommodates various visitors by providing options 
for collaboration (for
groups and families) and multiple content (i.e., information about exhibits’ 
history, aesthetics, usabil-
ity, etc.). The information is organized in a horizontal fashion (i.e., 
presentation of information in a
chronological order) and in a vertical fashion (i.e., detailed information 
about the exhibits). According
to her visiting style, the visitor can choose to view details or to be 
presented with a story of the artifacts
and so on.

2nd Scenario: Learning Application for a Medium-Size Museum. All the preceding 
still applyies.
However, visiting style is also present. For individuals visiting alone, the 
visiting style is observed
and assessed and different learning content is presented accordingly. Optimal 
routes are proposed
according to interests (Butterfly and Grasshopper visitors), stories of the 
exhibits are available (Ant
visitors), and general information about the rational of the exhibition is also 
offered (Fish visitors).
The technological solutions used are adaptable and allow user control.

3rd Scenario: Learning Application for a Large-Size Museum. It is important 
that visitors’ naviga-
tion is supported together with route suggestions according to interests. 
General information about
the different exhibitions is available together with detailed information about 
certain exhibits and
highlights. Proposals for future visits and further investigation are also 
presented. Once again, the
technological solutions used are adaptable and allow user control.

Linking the previous findings with computer science, such a modeling approach 
can be easily trans-
formed into effective algorithmic solutions which can lead to recommendation 
systems for learning
applications and mobile devices. The proposed approach can be used along with 
mobile devices (e.g.,
PDAs, mobile phones) provided to museum visitors upon their entrance. These 
devices combined with
the respective algorithms can then easily identify movement patterns of a 
visitor, through tracking
technology, in a timely manner. The application can then suggest those routes 
that have been deemed
more suitable for the specific user. In addition, the algorithms can also 
appropriately adapt the edu-
cational content that will be presented to the user, based on the identified 
visiting and cognitive style.
Therefore, combining the proposed modeling approach with existing technological 
solutions can lead
to effective recommendation systems tailored to the individual learning and 
cognitive needs of the
visitor.

In a previous work, it was suggested that the preceding modeling approach could 
be used in visitors’
mobile phones, in an attempt to reduce the cost of technology for museum use 
and also to avoid cog-
nitive overload of visitors. The Bluetooth technology of visitors’ mobile 
phones could be used together
with Bluetooth transmitters near the exhibits, tracking visitors’ physical 
movement and identifying


visiting style. The learning content would be adapted accordingly providing 
information relevant to
users’ cognitive styles [Antoniou and Lepouras 2005].

Furthermore, in the case of computer-mediated assistance in the design of 
physical exhibitions, the
findings of the current study could enhance the functionality of the software 
by allowing
curators/designers to predict and visualize possible visitor movement in the 
physical space. For exam-
ple, the different visiting styles can be used in a software application to 
describe stereotypic visitors
and assist curators in identifying both movement patterns as well as possible 
cognitive and learning
needs.

Acknowledging previous research explaining the importance of combining visiting 
style with dif-
ferent parameters of museum visits (like the physical aspect of the exhibitions 
and visitors’ personal
characteristics) [Oppermann and Specht 2000], the present study is a step 
towards personality-aware
interfaces. Investigating personality and situational factors in museum 
learning, this work should be
viewed as a part of a methodology for the development of museum learning 
technologies that certainly
requires further research. Nevertheless, the data gathered can be meaningfully 
used in a museum,
since past examples of use showed that employing visiting style in museum 
technologies enhances the
museum experience and increases learning [Marti et al. 2001]. In line with 
current findings, systems
like HIPS (Hyper-Interaction within Physical Space) [Broadbent and Marti 1997] 
and Hippie [Opper-
mann et al. 1999], by simply employing visitors’ visiting style, without 
targeting issues of visitors’
personalities, manage to augment the museum visit.

So far, this work has been solely focused on the modeling and profiling of 
visitors. However, the

main goal of our future works is to create concrete connections to the 
development of adaptive cultural
technologies in a form of a framework that can have direct implementation. 
Within this framework,
an important issue to investigate is the precise method by which users’ 
visiting style is determined at
each point during the visit, since people can change their visiting styles 
during a single visit. Perhaps
the use of a mixed method that combines qualitative and quantitative elements 
(e.g., camera obser-
vations and questionnaires) could provide answers. Finally, we have been using 
the term “learning”
in this work in a broad sense, without further specifying it, that could 
include anything from simple
information systems to pedagogically developed learning environments (based on 
the museum cura-
tors’ decisions). However, in our future work we aim at combining the findings 
from this research with
explicit pedagogic approaches, since it is essential to provide a clear 
learning context for the use of
museum learning technologies.

Finally, from the present study certain questions have been raised regarding 
museum-adaptable

applications. In an attempt to extend the visitors’ museum experience, 
different applications could
support the visitor before, during, and after her visit. Linking the physical 
museum space with a
possible virtual and online environment that could provide information prior to 
and after the visit,
it would be very interesting to investigate whether there is any correlation 
between the users’ online
behavior and their actual museum visit. This information could be used for the 
preparation of the
actual visit, by suggesting optimal routes, or providing appropriate learning 
content. The findings of
the present study revealed a high correlation between visiting and cognitive 
style. In this light, a
museum could identify the cognitive styles of its possible visitors online and 
during the actual visit,
use the information for effective adaptable solutions relevant to the visitor’s 
visiting and cognitive
needs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are particularly grateful to the director Dr. Kaltsas, the archaeologist Ms. 
Christopoulou and the
personnel of the National Archaeological Museum (Athens, Greece) for permitting 
and supporting the


present study. The authors also wish to acknowledge the valuable help of Dr. I. 
Lykourentzou (Univer-
sity of Peloponnese), Mr. T.A.H. Lunde and Prof. C. Agriantoni (University of 
Thessaly).

REFERENCES

ALZUA-SORZABAL, A., LINAZA, M. T., ABAD, M., ARRETXEA, L., AND SUSPERREGUI, A. 
2005. Interface evaluation for cultural

heritage applications: The case of FERRUM exhibition. In Proceedings of the 6th 
International Symposium on Virtual Reality,
Archeology and Cultural Heritage.

ANTONIOU, A. AND LEPOURAS, G. 2005. Using Bluetooth technology for personalized 
visitor information. In Proceedings of the
IADIS International Conference on Mobile Learning. 307–309.

ANTONIOU, A. AND LEPOURAS, G. 2006. Adaptation to visitors’ visiting and 
cognitive style. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference of Museology and ICOM-AVICOM Annual Conference.

ANTONIOU, A. AND LEPOURAS, G. 2008. Reflections on mobile and life long 
learning: Museums as application fields. In Proceed-
ings of the IADIS International Conference on Mobile Learning. 249–252.

ATKINS, H., MOORE, D., SHARPE, S., AND HOBBS, D. 2001. Learning style theory 
and computer mediated communications. In

Proceedings of the ED MEDIA Conference.

BITGOOD, S. 1998. An overview of the methodology of visitor studies. Visitor 
Behav. 3, 3, 4–6.

BITGOOD, S. 2002. Environmental psychology in museums, zoos, and other 
exhibition centers. In Handbook of Environmental
Psychology, R. Bechtel and A. Churchman, Eds. John Wiley and Sons.

BITGOOD, S. AND RICHARDSON, K. 1986. Validation of self-reports in a zoo. Tech. 
rep. 86-30, Center for Social Design, Jack-
sonville, AL.

BORUN, M. AND MILLER, M. 1980. What’s in a Name? A Study of the Effectiveness 
of Explanatory Labels in a Science Museum.
Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, PA.

BRIGGS-MYERS, I. AND MCCAULLEY, M. H. 1985.  Manual: A Guide to the Development 
and Use of the Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator. Consulting Psychologists Press.

BROADBENT, J. AND MARTI, P. 1997. Location aware interactive guides: Usability 
issues. In Proceedings of the ICHIM’97.

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.40.3065.

BUNT, A., CONATI, C., AND MCGRENERE, J. 2004. What role can adaptive support 
play in an adaptable system? In Proceedings
of the 9th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. 117–124.

CAPORUSSO, N. 2009. Personality-Aware interfaces for learning applications. In 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGUCCS Fall Con-
ference on User Services. 189–196.

CHITTARO, L. AND IERONUTTI, L. 2004. A visual tool for tracing users’ behavior 
in virtual environments. In Proceedings of the
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces. ACM, New York, 40–47.

DE BRA, P., AERTS, A., SMITS, D., AND STASH, N. 2002. AHA! Version 2.0. More 
adaptation flexibility for authors. In Proceedings
of the AACE ELearn Conference. 240–246.

DINI, R., PATERNO, F., AND SANTORO, C. 2007. An environment to support 
multi-user interaction and cooperation for improving
museum visits through games. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference 
on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services. ACM, New York, 515–521.

DOERING, Z. 2006. Visitor studies 101: Understanding audiences. Current Trends 
Audience Res. Eval. 19-20. AAM Committee
on Audience Research and Evaluation.

DOERING, Z. D. AND PEKARIK, A. J. 1998. Visitors to the Smithsonian 
Institution: Some observations. Visitor Studies Theory
Res. Pract. 9, 40–50.

DURLING, D., CROSS, N., AND JOHNSON, J. 1996. Personality and learning 
preferences of students in design and design-related
disciplines. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Design and 
Technology Educational Research (IDATER’96). J. S.
Smith, Ed. 88–94.

FALK, J. H. AND DIERKING, L. D. 1997. School field trips: Assessing their long 
term impact. Curator 40, 3, 211–218.
FALK, J., KOREAN, J., DIERKING, L., AND DREBLOW, L. 1985. Predicting visitor 
behaviour. Curator 28, 4, 249–257.

FINDLATER, L. AND MCGRENERE, J. 2004. A comparison of static, adaptive, and 
adaptable menus. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 89–96.

FORD, N. 1995. Levels and types of mediation in instructional systems: An 
individual difference approach. Int. J. Hum.-
Comput. Studies 43, 243–259.

GABRIELLI, F., MARTI, P., AND PETRONI, L. 1999. The environment as interface. 
In Proceedings of the i3 Annual Conference:
Community of the Future. 44–47.


GAETA, A., GAETA, M., AND RITROVATO, P. 2009. A grid based software 
architecture for delivery of adaptive and personalized
learning experiences. Personal Ubiq. Comput. 13, 3, 207–217.

GRAZIOLA, I., PIANESI, F., ZANCANARO, M., AND GOREN-BAR, D. 2005. Dimensions of 
adaptivity in mobile systems: Personality
and people’s attitudes. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on 
Intelligent User Interfaces. 223–230.

GWEON, G., ROSE, C., CAREY, R., AND ZAISS, Z. 2006. Providing support for 
adaptive scripting in an online collaborative learning
environment. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. 251–260.

HALL, T. AND BANNON, L. 2005. Designing ubiquitous computing to enhance 
children’s interaction in museums. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Interaction Design and Children. ACM, New York, 62–69.

HUDSON, L. 1966. Contrary Imaginations. Penguin, New York.

HUIZENGA, J., ADMIRRAL, W., AKKERMAN, S., AND DAM, G. T. 2009. Mobile 
game-based learning in secondary education: Engage-
ment, motivation and learning in a mobile city game. J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 
25, 4, 332–344.

IGUCHI, J. H. 2006. Visitor studies from the psychological and sociological 
points of view. Global Communications Platform,
Japanese Institute of Global Communications, Colloquium No. 66.

http://www.glocom.org/special topics/colloquium/20060718 iguchi 
visitor2/index.html (accessed 12/09).

JACUCCI, G., SPAGNOLLI, A., CHALAMBALAKIS, A., MORRISON, A., LIKKANEN, L., 
ROVEDA, S., AND BERTONCINI, M. 2009. Bodily

explorations in space: Social experience of a multimodal art installation. In 
Proceedings of the INTERACT’09 Conference.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5727. Springer, 62.

KAGAN, J. 1965. Impulsive and reflective children: Significance of conceptual 
tempo. In Learning and the Educational Process,

J. D. Krumboltz, Ed. Rand McNally, Chicago, IL.

KELLY, L. 2000. Understanding conceptions of learning. In Proceedings of 
GERG’00 Conference.
http://www.amonline.net.au/amarc/pdf/research/paper2000.pdf (accessed 2/09).

KETTANURAK, V. N., RAMAMURTHY, K., AND HASEMAN, W. D. 2001. User attitude as a 
mediator of learning performance improve-
ment in an interactive multimedia environment: An empirical investigation of 
the degree of interactivity and learning styles.
Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Studies 54, 541–583.

KOLB, D. 1985. Learning Style Inventory: Technical Manual. McBer and Company, 
Boston, MA.

KUFLIK, T., SHEIDIN, J., JBARA, S., GOREN-BAR, D., SOFFER, P., STOCK, O., AND 
ZANCANARO, M. 2007. Supporting small groups

in the museum by context-aware communication services. In Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces. 305–308.

LAWRENCE, G. L. 1997. Looking at type and learning styles. Center for 
Application of Psychological Type, Inc., Gainesville,
FL.

LEINHARDT, G., CROWLEY, K., AND KNUTSON, K. 2002. Learning Conversations in 
Museums. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ.

LI, X., HESS, T. J., MCNAB, A. L., AND YU, Y. 2009. Culture and acceptance of 
global Web sites: A cross-country study of the
effects of national cultural values on acceptance of a personal Web portal. ACM 
SIGMIS 40, 4, 49–74.

LIU, M. AND REED, W. M. 1995. The effect of hypermedia assisted instruction on 
second-language learning through a semantic-
network-based approach. J. Educ. Comput. Res. 12, 2, 159–175.

MARTI, P., GABRIELLI, F., AND PUCCI, F. 2001. Situated interaction in art. 
Personal Ubiq. Comput. 5, 71–74.

MARTIN, C. R. 1997. Looking at type: The fundamentals. Center for Application 
of Psychological Type, Inc., Gainesville, FL.
MCGREEN, N. AND SAANCHEZ, A. I. 2005. Mapping challenge: A case study in the 
use of mobile phones in collaborative, contex-

tual learning. In Procedings of the Mobile Learning Conference, P. Isaias et 
al., Eds. 213–217.

MCGRENERE, J., BAECKER, R. M., AND BOOTH, K. S. 2007. A field evaluation of an 
adaptable two-interface design for feature-rich
software. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 14, 1.

MUNTEAN, C. H. AND MUNTEAN, G. M. 2009. Open corpus architecture for 
personalized ubiquitous e-learning. Personal Ubiq.
Comput. 13, 3, 197–205.

MUSEUMS ASSOCIATION. 2010. Code of ethics for museums. 
http://www.museumassocation.org/publications/code-of-ethics (ac-
cessed 12/09).

MYERS AND BRIGGS FOUNDATION. 2010. Myers-Briggs homepage. 
http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-
basics/ (accessed 7/10).

OPPERMANN, R. AND SPECHT, M. 2000. A context-sensitive nomadic information 
system as an exhibition guide. In Proceedings
of the UbiComp’00. Springer, 127–142.

OPPERMANN, R., SPECHT, M., AND JACENIAK, I. 1999. Hippie: A nomadic information 
system. In Proceedings of the 1st Interna-
tional Symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, H. Gellersen, Ed. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1707.
Springer, 330–333.


PAPANIKOLAOU, K. A. AND GRIGORIADOU, M. 2005. Modelling and externalizing 
learners’ interaction behaviour. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Learner Modelling for Reflection, International Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence in Education. 52–61.

PAPANIKOLAOU, K., GRIGORIADOU, M., AND KORNILAKIS, H. 2001. Instructional and 
interface design in an adaptive education
hypermedia system. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction, Panhellenic Conference with Interna-
tional Participation. 223–228.

PAPANIKOLAOU, K., GRIGORIADOU, M., KORNILAKIS, H., AND MAGOULAS, G. D. 2002. 
INSPIRE: An intelligent system for person-

alized instruction in a remote environment. In Hypermedia: Openness, Structural 
Awareness, and Adaptivity, S. Reich et al.,
Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2266. Springer, 215–225.

PARRY, H. J. AND CROSSLEY, H. M. 1950. Validity of responses to survey 
questions. Public Opinion Quart. 14, 61–80.
PASK, G. 1972. A fresh look at cognition and the individual. Int. J. Man-Mach. 
Studies, 211–216.

PETRELLI, D. A., DE ANGELI, A., AND CONVERTINO, G. 1999a. A user-centered 
approach to user modeling. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference. J. Kay, Ed. Springer, 255–264.

PETRELLI, D., NOT, E., AND ZANCANARO, M. 1999b. Getting engaged and getting 
tired: What is in a museum experience. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Attitude, Personality and Emotions in 
User-Adapted Interaction. (Held in conjunction with the
UM’99).

RAPTIS, D., TSELIOS, N., AND AVOURIS, N. 2005. Context-Based design of mobile 
applications for museums: A survey of exist-
ing practices. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Human 
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services (MobiCHI’05). ACM Press, New York, 153–160.

RIDING, R. J. AND CHEEMA, I. 1991. Cognitive styles- An overview and 
integration. Educ. Psychol. 11, 193–215.
RIDING, R. AND RAYNER, S. G. 1998. Cognitive Styles and Learning Strategies. 
David Fulton Publisher, London.

ROCCHI, C., STOCK, O., ZANCANARO, M., KRUPPA, M., AND KRUGER, A. 2004. The 
museum visit: Generating seamless personalized
presentations on multiple devices. In Proceedings of the 9th International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’04).
ACM, New York, 316–318.

SCHROYEN, J., GABRIELS, K., LUYTEN, K., TEUNKENS, D., ROBERT, K., CONINX, K., 
FLERACKERS, E., AND MANSHOVEN, E. 2008.

Training social learning skills by collaborative mobile gaming in museums. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on
Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE’08). ACM, New York, 46–49.

SERRELL, B. 1998. Paying Attention: Visitors and Museum Exhibitions. American 
Association of Museums, Washington, DC.
SPECHT, M. AND OPPERMANN, R. 1999. User modeling and adaptivity in nomadic 
information systems. In Proceedings of the

13th Annual Conference: Community of the Future. 65–68.

SUMI, Y. AND MASE, K. 2002. Supporting the awareness of shared interests and 
experiences in communities. Int. J. Hum.-
Comput. Studies 56, 1, 127–146.

TERRENGHI, L. AND ZIMMERMANN, A. 2004. Tailored audio augmented environments 
for museums. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’04). ACM, New York, 
334–336.

UMIKER-SEBEOK, J. 1994. Behavior in a museum: A semio-cognitive approach to 
museum consumption experiences. Signif.
Behav. J. Res. Semiotics Comm. Theory Cognit. Sci. 1, 1, 52–100.

VERON, E. AND LEVASSEUR, M. 1983. Ethnographie de l’exposition. Bibliotheque 
Publique d’Information, Centre Georges Pom-
pidou, Paris.

WAKKARY, R. AND HATALA, M. 2007. Situated play in a tangible interface and 
adaptive audio museum guide. Personal Ubiq.
Comput. 11, 3, 171–191.

WALCZAK, K., WOJCIECHOWSKI, R., AND CELLARY, W. 2006. Dynamic interactive VR 
network services for education. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST’06). 
ACM, New York, 277–286.

WELLS, M. AND BUTLER, B. 2002. A visitor-centered evaluation hierarchy. Visitor 
Studies Today! 5, 1, 5–11.
WITKIN, H. A. 1962. Psychological Differention: Studies of Development. Wiley, 
New York.

WITKIN, H. A. 1978. Cognitive Styles in Personal and Cultural Adaptation. Heinz 
Werner Lecture Series, vol. 11.

Received March 2009; revised March 2010; accepted July 2010

