Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts                                          © 2017 
American Psychological Association
2017, Vol. 11, No. 3, 265–275                                           1931-3896/17/$12.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/aca0000107

Do You See What I See? An Investigation of the Aesthetic Experience in the Laboratory and Museum




Eva Specker
University of Amsterdam


Michiel van Elk
University of Amsterdam
Pablo P. L. Tinio
Montclair State University
Two studies examined people’s aesthetic experiences of art in the laboratory and the museum. The 
theoretical framework guiding the research was based on the Mirror Model of Art (Tinio, 2013), 
which proposes that the process of artistic creation and artistic reception mirror each other. 
Study 1 used a think-aloud protocol to assess people’s natural and spontaneous reactions while 
looking at art. Study 2 examined whether presenting information about an artwork in a certain order 
(lower-order to higher- order information or higher-order to lower-order information) enhances 
aspects of the aesthetic experi- ence and retention of information about art. Studies 1 and 2 were 
each conducted both in a laboratory and in a museum. The results replicate those of previous 
research that showed that the aesthetic experience of art is enhanced in the museum as compared 
with the laboratory setting. In addition, the results show that the effects of presenting 
information in a certain order (lower-order to higher-order information) depend on the context of 
presentation: museum visitors were better able to remember information about art than laboratory 
participants. Overall, the findings suggest that the Mirror Model is a good represen- tation of how 
people naturally process art, but that certain aspects of the model could be optimized.

Keywords: aesthetics, creativity, psychology of art, art education, museums



On any given day, approximately 2.5 million people in the United States visit museums (American 
Alliance of Museums, n.d.). When people are asked to evaluate their visit on a scale from 1 to 10, 
with 10 reflecting a high level of appreciation, average ratings of 9 and higher are common (e.g., 
Smith & Wolf, 1996; Smith, Wolf, & O’Brien, 1996). Thus, a visit to a museum seems to be a valuable 
and meaningful experience that many people engage in frequently. In addition, informal experiences 
with art also occur in everyday settings, such as when reading art books, seeing pictures in 
magazines, and looking at art posters. To un- derstand the aesthetic experiences that people have 
when they are interacting with art, several models of the aesthetic experience have been proposed 
(Chatterjee, 2004, 2010; Leder, Belke, Oe- berst, & Augustin, 2004; Leder & Nadal, 2014; Locher, 
Over- beeke, & Wensveen, 2010; Tinio, 2013).
One of these models is the Mirror Model of Art (Tinio, 2013). The Mirror Model postulates that 
artistic creation and aesthetic


Editor’s Note. Paul J. Silvia served as the action editor for this article.—RR-P


Eva Specker, Religion Cognition and Behavior Lab, University of Am- sterdam; Pablo P. L. Tinio, 
Department of Educational Foundations, Mont- clair State University; Michiel van Elk, Religion 
Cognition and Behavior Lab, University of Amsterdam.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eva Specker, who is now at the 
Department of Basic Psychological Research and Research Methods, University of Vienna, Liebiggasse 
5, 1010 Vienna, Austria. E-mail: evaspecker@hotmail.com
































265
reception “mirror” each other. From the creation side, an artist starts by exploring core themes 
and ideas for a potential artwork. After an idea, or a set of related ideas, is selected as the 
“founda- tion” of the work, the artist subsequently expands the work, adding more elements and 
materials to the foundation and at times adapt- ing the initial idea to take situational demands 
into account. Fi- nally, finishing touches are added, thus completing the art creation process. 
From the receptive side, perceivers first encounter the surface features of an artwork, and then, 
after their initial attention is captured, move forward toward the exploration of the general 
structure of the work (e.g., composition of a painting) as well as the identification of depicted 
elements. Finally, they attempt to understand the artwork and grasp the concepts and ideas that 
underlie and that may have motivated its creation. Thus, when Mark Rothko claimed that “the people 
who weep before my pictures are having the same religious experience I had when I painted them” (as 
quoted by Stoker, 2008, p. 90), he may have been capturing the essence of the Mirror Model of Art.
Through the connection between the creation and reception processes, the Mirror Model extends 
previous models that have selectively focused on either the reception or creation side of art. This 
selective focus on one or the other is one of the current issues in the field of psychology of art, 
as discussed by Vartanian (2014). That said, most of the models accounting for the aesthetic expe- 
rience (Chatterjee, 2004, 2010; Leder et al., 2004; Leder & Nadal, 2014; Locher et al., 2010), 
including the Mirror Model, describe the art reception process in similar ways. The first stage 
mainly involves automatic visual processing (of, e.g., visual complexity and color). The second 
stage involves more detailed processing

266                      SPECKER, TINIO, AND VAN ELK


during which the visitor might try to evaluate the expertise of the artist or identify issues of an 
art historical nature, such as the style of the work (e.g., Impressionism). During this process, 
people may draw on their personal taste and art expertise as well as contextual information such as 
labels describing an artwork. Therefore, they are drawing from their knowledge base to make sense 
of the work. Finally, the third stage involves interpretation— either in an art- specific or 
self-referential way—and evaluation of the work. The general idea is that people use the 
information they gathered in the previous stages to arrive at these interpretations and eval- 
uations. However, what distinguishes the Mirror Model from other models is that whereas other 
models postulate a corre- spondence between particular characteristics of the artwork and the 
viewing process, the Mirror Model additionally postulates a direct correspondence between artistic 
creation and artistic re- ception. This idea is illustrated in Figure 1. This unique feature of the 
Mirror Model helps to open a more integrative line of research that combines art making and art 
viewing rather than studying one or the other in isolation as has been common practice (Vartanian, 
2014).
The present research is a direct empirical test of aspects of the Mirror Model of Art (Tinio, 
2013). First, the research will inves- tigate whether the model accurately represents how people 
natu- rally process art. Second, it will investigate if presenting infor- mation to people viewing 
art in a manner that corresponds to the order implied by the model could have specific benefits for 
viewers, such as enhanced aesthetic experiences and better memory of information associated with 
art. Although most previous research has focused on describing and understanding the art-viewing 
process, this study investigates the potential benefits (i.e., enhanced aesthetic experience and 
information retention) of following a certain order of presenting information to people interacting 
with art. Therefore, aesthetic reception is examined in light of what is known about artistic 
creation as described by the model.
The Present Research
We examined two main research questions: (a) To what extent does the model represent how people 
naturally process art? and
(b) Does presenting information in a manner that corresponds to the model (i.e., the steps 
described by the model as being part of the natural viewing process) have specific benefits to the 
viewers? Benefits in this case are considered as enhancement of the aesthetic experience and an 
increase in information retention. Information retention refers to the amount of information about 
the artwork that people remember.
These questions were addressed in two studies— one qualitative and the other quantitative. Through 
the use of a mixed-method approach, we hoped to gain a deeper and more detailed under- standing of 
how people process art and to optimize experimental control while maintaining high ecological 
validity as well as to be able to substantiate findings by combining one approach with the other.
In Study 1, we investigated the extent to which the model represents how people naturally process 
art. Participants were asked to spontaneously report their experience while they viewed an artwork. 
One half of the participants performed this task in a museum and the other half in the laboratory. 
In Study 2, we used a 2 (information presentation in accordance with the model vs. information 
presentation not in accordance with the model; from this point on, we refer to these as 
model-consistent order vs. model-inconsistent order, respectively) × 2 (museum vs. labora- tory 
context) design to investigate if presenting information in accordance with the stages of the model 
affects the art perception process. We hypothesized that using a model-consistent order will lead 
to a higher level of information retention and an enhanced aesthetic experience as compared with 
using a model-inconsistent order. The idea behind this is the notion that if the model repre- sents 
a natural way of processing artworks, following this natural structure should enhance the aesthetic 
experience and increase information retention.


















Figure 1. The Mirror Model of Art. Image derived from Tinio (2013). See the online article for the 
color version of this figure.

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?
267


In addition to the presentation of information, we also accounted for two factors known to 
influence the aesthetic experience: art expertise and context of viewing. Regarding the former, 
several studies have shown differences in the processing of art stimuli between people with high as 
compared with low art expertise (e.g., Augustin & Leder, 2006; Cupchik & Laszlo, 1992; Winston & 
Cupchik, 1992). For example, Cupchik and Laszlo (1992) found that naïve viewers (people low in art 
expertise) typically use a content-related processing style whereas art experts use a more 
style-related processing style. Therefore, we included a measure of art expertise to control for 
this factor.
The inclusion of both museum and laboratory contexts ad- dresses an ongoing concern in the field of 
psychology of art. Research has shown differences in how artworks are processed and evaluated based 
on whether they are viewed in the museum or laboratory, with more enhanced aesthetic experiences 
generally found in the museum context (e.g., Brieber, Nadal, Leder, & Rosenberg, 2014; Locher, 
Smith, & Smith, 1999; Tinio, Smith, & Smith, 2014). Including context as a factor allows us to 
replicate these effects as well as to test if the effects of the model are robust across two 
distinct contexts.

Study 1

Method
Participants. Study 1 included 20 participants (13 males, 7 fe- males; Mean agemuseum = 43.4 years, 
SD = 9.3 and Mean agelaboratory =
20.1 years, SD = 1.4). Ten participants were undergraduate stu-
dents at Montclair State University who received course credit for their participation and who were 
tested in the laboratory; the other 10 were visitors to the Queens Museum in New York.
We measured the participants’ level of expertise using the Aesthetic Fluency Scale (Smith & Smith, 
2006; see Appendix), which consists of 10 items (α = .90). Smith and Smith (2006) define artistic 
fluency as “the knowledge base concerning art that facilitates aesthetic experience in 
individuals.” Participants indi- cate their familiarity with certain art concepts (e.g., Fauvism, 
Chinese Scrolls, Abstract Expressionism) on a 0 – 4 scale. The level of art expertise (M = 1.4) was 
relatively low in our sample. Materials and procedure.  All participants viewed the same artwork, 
The Senate by William Gropper (c. 1950; see Figure 2). The museum participants viewed the actual 
artwork and the lab- oratory group viewed a printed, high-resolution version of the artwork that 
was approximately the same size as the original. This painting was chosen because it is a 
conventional type of artwork (i.e., medium-sized figurative painting). In addition, reproductions 
of this painting cannot easily be found on the Internet, and Gropper is a lesser known artist. 
These factors contributed to reducing participants’ potential familiarity with the artwork.¹ 
Because of the novelty of the research design within the field of psychological aesthetics—the use 
of mixed methods in both the laboratory and museum—we decided to focus data collection on the 
Gropper
work.
This allowed for extensive and in-depth data collection that
Participants spontaneously reported their experience while look- ing at the artwork. All 
participants received the following instruc- tions:
We would like you to look at this artwork and approach/view it as you normally would. At the same 
time, we would like you to describe your experience (thoughts, emotions) while you are looking at 
the artwork by talking into an audio recording device. Please try and be as accurate and detailed 
as possible when verbalizing your thought process and experience when looking at the work. You can 
take as much time as you want. After you are finished, we would like you to fill out a 
questionnaire.
After the think-aloud procedure, participants completed the aes- thetic fluency scale and reported 
demographic information.
One half of the participants performed this task in a museum and the other half in the laboratory. 
Visitors to the Queens Museum (Queens, NY) were asked to participate as they entered the gallery 
and approached the artwork. When they expressed interest in participating, they received an 
informed consent form. Because foot traffic was generally low in the gallery where the museum 
participants completed the task, distraction from other visitors was minimal.
The procedure for the laboratory study was similar to that used in the museum study. In addition, 
the poster reproduction was hung on the wall of the laboratory to increase the similarity of 
presentation between the two contexts. However, to ensure a difference in context between the 
laboratory and the museum, the corresponding label and wall-text that accompanied the original work 
were not made available to the laboratory participants. This also has the benefit of making the 
laboratory condition more similar to previous aesthetic research conducted in the laboratory, where 
often no label is provided.
Data analysis.  Participants’ verbatim reports were transcribed and subsequently thematically coded 
using a recursive process in which the three aesthetic reception stages of the Mirror Model served 
as guidelines for organizing emergent themes from the data. Stage I represented basic, low-level 
processing. Such processing involves automatic early processing of shapes and colors as well as 
initial responses to the artwork. Stage II represented structural processing and use of knowledge 
(both general and art-related knowledge). Structural processing involves an intermediate level of 
processing that is related to the content of the work and how different elements in the artwork are 
related to one another. Use of knowledge involves memory-based processing that helps with such 
actions as categorizing the work in terms of style and drawing from personal knowledge and 
experiences to identify what is being depicted. Stage III represented the themes interpretation and 
aes- thetic judgment, which are higher-order responses. Interpretation is related to the 
“meaning-making” process in which people inter- pret the work, and aesthetic judgment involves 
people’s overall evaluation of the work.
The coding was performed by two coders, one of which was the principal investigator and the other a 
research assistant unfamiliar with the hypotheses. The set of transcripts from the museum 
participants was first coded. Then the coders discussed any differ-
addresses the two main research questions within a reasonable       

research design. However, we do understand that other artworks should be included in future 
studies.
¹ All participants also completed a mix-and-match task, the results of which will be reported 
elsewhere.

268                      SPECKER, TINIO, AND VAN ELK













Figure 2. William Gropper, “The Senate,” c.1950, New York, NY: Private Collection. See the online 
article for the color version of this figure.



ences in coding until the final coding was agreed upon. The same process was applied to the set of 
transcripts from the laboratory participants.
All transcripts were organized by each coder according to the three stages. This was done to assess 
the extent to which the transcripts reflected the three-stage structure depicted in the model. The 
division of stages was based on “semantic shifts.” For exam- ple, if a participant first talked 
about the use of color in the work and then shifted attention to talk about the content of the 
work, then this would be seen as a change in focus and hence serve as a dividing line between one 
stage and the next. The length and amount of utterances corresponding to the stages were allowed to 
vary. For example, it is possible that Stage I would be shorter (in time/amount of utterances) than 
Stage II or Stage III. It is also possible that transcripts of participants were divided in, for 
exam- ple, two or four stages rather than three stages.

Results
With the exception of two participants who showed two stages of processing—with both showing no 
signs of the first stage of processing—all participants showed three discernable stages of 
processing. Therefore, our discussion of the results will consecu- tively present Stages I–III. The 
average duration of the verbatim reports was comparable (Mmuseum = 89.7 sec, SD = 33.3 and 
Mlaboratory = 103.4 sec, SD = 39.1). The means do not include two outliers who were laboratory 
participants who exhibited durations of 902 and 285 sec.
Stage I (basic, low-level responses).  Because this first stage involves early automatic 
processing, we assumed that the number of reports regarding this stage would be lower than the 
other stages. For reports on this stage to occur, participants would need to consciously reflect on 
these automatic processes, which would be a challenging task.
Our results confirmed this assumption because there was a small number of people making statements 
about their initial responses to the work, such as (dis)liking or (un)interest. Eight people (40%) 
did not comment on Stage I themes at all. When people did mention such themes, they often combined 
them with the later stage of aesthetic judgment. In this later stage, people make an overall 
judgment about the work. In contrast, initial responses represent a more automatic response to the 
work. Stage I themes
occurring at a later stage can be better understood as part of a conceptual overlap between 
aesthetic judgment, as a subsequent conscious evaluation of a work, and initial evaluative 
responses, which occur automatically. Furthermore, there were six people who did not make 
statements about any of the themes correspond- ing to the first stage.² It is especially notable 
that five of these participants participated in the laboratory. Because a great deal of the visual 
detail that is processed in this stage is inherently more present in the genuine artwork than the 
reproduction that the laboratory participants viewed, the lack of visual detail in the laboratory 
setting may help to explain this finding.
In sum, our findings concerning Stage I reflect the fact that it is difficult for participants to 
consciously reflect and report on auto- matic processes. In addition, when there is a lower level 
of visual detail (i.e., there is less information about the stimulus) for the participants to 
process, it is even more difficult for participants to consciously reflect and report on these 
themes. This leads to a decrease in how often such themes are reported on in the labora- tory, 
where there are fewer visual details available as compared with the museum.
Stage  II  (structural  and  memory-related  processing). Taking into consideration the finding 
that reports on the first stage are difficult and rare, one of the first aspects of an artwork that 
people explicitly talk about is the content of the work. Many participants start with “I see,” “so 
I look at this piece,” and then continue with, for example, “. . . a man shouting.” Therefore, 
participants showed signs of starting with a more memory-based, structural type of processing 
rather than with a detailed and auto- matic processing as the model would prescribe. We have named 
this a “motivation to understand,” with people starting with nam- ing what they see (content-wise) 
to understand what they are looking at. This is in line with Russell’s (2003) “effort after 
meaning” theory, which postulates that part of the pleasure derived

² The reader may wonder how this should be understood in combination with the finding that only two 
participants showed two discernable stages. To understand this more fully, we refer the reader to 
the third paragraph of the section on Stage III. In this paragraph, a looping pattern is described. 
In this pattern, Stages I and III are thematically the same. This leads to the possibility of 
having three discernable stages while at the same time having no report on themes corresponding to 
the first stage as conceptualized by the Mirror Model.

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?
269


from engaging with an artwork stems from making a successful interpretation of it and discerning 
the artist’s message. This idea may be seen in several utterances that were not directly consistent 
with the model. For example, one participant stated, “I have to read the text on the wall first,” 
after which the participant proceeded to do just that before looking at the painting. An instance 
of a combination of both of these types of utterances is a participant who stated “the first thing 
I see . . . I don’t know what I’m looking at.”
Because of this motivation to understand, many participants reported a high level of structural 
processing (utterances related to an intermediate level of processing that is related to the 
content of the work and how different elements are related to one another). Another frequently 
occurring theme was interpretation (a theme the model describes as characteristic of the last 
stage). All partic- ipants made statements about structural processing and interpreta- tion. There 
were even two participants who only spoke about these two themes and did not make statements about 
any of the other themes. In addition, a combination of these themes was frequent, especially when a 
statement included clear aspects of both themes but could not be separated into two separate parts 
(for example, because of the way it was phrased). What seems to be happening is that people mention 
a structural aspect of the work and then interpret that aspect immediately; conversely, they give 
an inter- pretation of the work and then provide an example of a structural aspect that led them to 
the interpretation. Thus, people seem to be continuously looping through Stages II and III in an 
attempt to understand the artwork. For example, one participant said, “You sorta get that conflict 
in the people . . . [interpretation] the tension in their clothes and their faces really well 
[structural processing].” Another example would be a participant who said:
. . . it looks like the main guy’s ehhmm telling a speech . . . [structural processing] that most 
of the other people don’t care about— [interpretation] some of them are really just . . . really 
bored or ehmm really don’t care [interpretation], we have two men gossiping in the bottom left 
corner [structural processing] ehmm... we have one, two, three men that are about to fall asleep. 
[structural processing] The gentlemen in the middle with the blue tie looks like he’s about to walk 
away [structural processing/interpretation].

To quantify this finding, we investigated transitions between the themes. For example, in the quote 
“... it looks like the main guy’s ehmmm telling a speech... [structural processing] that most of 
the other people don’t care about—[interpretation]” shows a transition from Stage II to Stage III. 
If people really loop between Stages II and III, then transitions from Stage II to Stage III (and 
vice versa) should make up the largest proportion of transitions. To investigate this, we first 
calculated the proportion of such transitions per participant to adjust for variation in length of 
verbatim reports. We then took the average proportion for each transition. Our results confirm that 
people loop between Stage II and Stage III. Transi- tions from Stage II to Stage III made up, on 
average, 36% of all transitions; transitions from Stage III to Stage II made up, on average, 33%. 
Together they make up 69% of all transitions. All other transitions (Stage III to Stage I, Stage I 
to Stage III, Stage II to Stage I, and Stage I to Stage II) each made up less than 10%, on average.
These results are best explained by the finding of Cupchik and Laszlo (1992), who showed that 
people low in art expertise (naïve
viewers) typically use a content-related processing approach whereas experts use a more 
style-focused processing approach. Our sample was low in art expertise. Thus, the fact that we 
found a mainly content-related processing style seems to be consistent with Cupchik and Laszlo’s 
(1992) findings. There were only three participants who could be considered as “experts” in our 
sample, and all three of these experts were participants in the museum. These experts showed a more 
style-focused processing approach, as would be expected based on Cupchik and Laszlo’s (1992) 
findings. This style-focused processing approach was evident by their use of art-related knowledge 
as a starting point for their viewing process. One participant stated,
I’m looking at William Gropper’s supposedly famous painting of the Senate [use of art knowledge] 
from I assume the early fifties [use of art knowledge]. I know enough from the background to know 
that Gropper was in front of the McCarthy Committee, pled the 5th and was blacklisted for it [use 
of art knowledge].

For another participant, a style-related processing approach was even clearer. This participant 
first summed up what they knew about the artwork and consequently talked about the painting 
technique that the painter used in the work:
Well ehh it was painted in 1950 [use of art knowledge]. It’s certainly of its time [use of art 
knowledge]. It looks very American . . . [use of art knowledge]. It looks abstract [use of art 
knowledge]. There is an illustrative element to it uhm . . . [use of art knowledge]. The 
brushstrokes are very precise [detailed processing]. They almost look like pastels [detailed 
processing] or . . . some sort of crayon instead of oil paint [detailed processing]. The color 
palette is very mid-century [use of art knowledge].

One of the experts was the participant described above, who started by reading the wall-text. It 
seems that this participant was lacking in art knowledge about this particular artist and because 
she is used to having this as a starting point of processing, she used the knowledge available in 
the museum context. Furthermore, this participant was the only person in our entire sample to 
comment on the use of line in the piece as well as to make several other statements related to use 
of art knowledge, clearly showing a style-focused processing approach.
There was also a difference in how laboratory versus museum participants attempted to understand 
the work. Museum partici- pants made use of the museum context (e.g., by referring to the 
wall-text); thus, they used a form of external art knowledge inher- ent in the context to aid their 
understanding of the work. On the other hand, laboratory participants were deprived of this 
context— there was no artwork label or wall-text, as is common in most research on aesthetic 
responses to artworks. For this sample, there was a higher occurrence of use of personal knowledge 
in an effort to understand and interpret the artwork. For example, several participants mentioned 
that the work reminded them of a class- room. Considering the fact that all laboratory participants 
were students, this is a clear instance of use of personal knowledge. Both strategies reflect 
memory-based processing as described by the model as well as the importance of context.
In sum, our findings regarding Stage II show that naïve viewers, who made up most of our sample, 
showed a content-related pro- cessing approach, which is in correspondence with Cupchik and 
Laszlo’s (1992) findings. This content-related approach seems to

270                      SPECKER, TINIO, AND VAN ELK


promote a “loop” between Stage II and Stage III. We have ex- plained this phenomenon through the 
concept of a motivation to understand—participants want to understand what they are looking at when 
they are looking at art. Therefore, naïve viewers who have limited art-related knowledge focus on 
content-related aspects of the work. Thus, they look at a specific structural aspect of a work and 
interpret it and then proceed to the next aspect to be inter- preted; alternatively, they give 
their interpretation and then point to aspects of the work to explain how they obtained that 
interpreta- tion. Likewise, when art-related knowledge is available to them through, for example, 
the museum context, they will use this external knowledge in their interpretation process. If this 
knowl- edge is not available, then they will use their own personal knowl- edge to interpret the 
work. These findings can be loosely related to the stages of aesthetic development as proposed by 
Housen (2007). In our sample, people started by mentioning what they were seeing, which is similar 
to Housen’s “Accountive Stage” (Stage I). Then they were motivated to understand the work and used 
per- sonal and/or art related knowledge to interpret the work. In this case, “The Constructive 
Stage” (Stage II) of Housen can be seen as reflecting the use of personal knowledge and “The 
Classifying Stage” (Stage III) as reflecting the use of art-related knowledge. From a developmental 
point of view, it makes sense to conceptu- alize the classifying stage as later in development than 
the con- structive stage because it is only possible to engage with art-related knowledge 
processing when one has attained a sufficient amount of such knowledge. However, the way in which 
these two types of knowledge are used during aesthetic experiences may be similar, if not the same, 
which is apparent from our data and is conceptual- ized in the Mirror Model. The “Interpretive” 
(Stage IV) and “Re-Creative” (Stage V) stages of Housen’s aesthetic development model should then, 
in theory, be connected to Stage III of the Mirror Model.
Stage III: (higher level processing: meaning-making).  The themes of aesthetic emotion and judgment 
occurred frequently at the end of the aesthetic encounter, as the model describes. For example, 
three participants ended their viewing by making aes- thetic judgment statements. All three of them 
talked about the content-related aspects (and their corresponding interpretations) and then 
concluded their viewing by saying “It’s pretty cool,” “It’s very eye-catching,” or “Well, actually, 
it’s a really nice piece . . .” Likewise, one participant concluded her viewing by making an 
aesthetic emotion statement: “So . . . it’s pretty depressing hahaha, it’s a pretty depressing 
painting . . . , pretty dark . . .” Thus, it seems that the themes of aesthetic emotion and 
aesthetic judgment tend to occur at the end of the aesthetic encounter. After partici- pants have 
“finished” their content-related processing, they tend to turn to their judgment of the work or 
state how the work made them feel.
There were some instances where aesthetic emotion was the first thing people mentioned. Although 
this was a rare occurrence, it seems notable that for some participants the initial emotional 
reaction seemed to be central and would preside over pure content- related processing. For example, 
one participant said, “It gives you a feel of hostility, makes me feel uncomfortable . . .” 
Afterward, this participant also followed the motivation to understand pattern previously described 
by saying, “I mean they’re all arguing through something . . . [interpretation], their expressions 
are not
pleasing . . . [structural processing] they all seem upset or con- cerned about something 
[interpretation].”
As mentioned, people made many interpretation statements, mainly as part of a content-processing 
approach. However, some participants started this process by giving their initial interpretation of 
the work, then moved on to discuss the structural aspects of the work that led them to their 
initial interpretation, and then con- cluded with a final interpretation— hence following a 
“looping” pattern. For example, one participant started by saying that “It looks like the main 
guy’s ehhmm telling a speech . . . [structural processing]—that most of the other people don’t care 
about [in- terpretation]” and ended with saying
they seem as if they’re all done listening to the speech [interpretation] while the gentleman in 
the middle is tired of giving the speech [interpretation] . . . but yeah you’ve two men with sour 
faces on as if they’re agreeing with him and mad at the other side, the other party, that he’s 
against [interpretation] or, just upset that they have to be there [interpretation]. . . . 
In these cases, the interpretation statements seem to be more similar to the aesthetic judgment and 
aesthetic emotion statements occurring in Stage III; that is, in all of these instances, people 
have processed the work and then made a final summary, just as described by the model. Likewise, 
another participant, already mentioned earlier as ending with aesthetic emotion, also displayed 
this looping pattern. She actually began her viewing by stating “It’s definitely eerie .   
[aesthetic emotion/interpretation]” and
mentioned in the beginning that “there’s definitely a sense of uhmm, dead or something ominous, not 
very harmonious, going on [aesthetic emotion/interpretation].”
In sum, we found that the topic of interpretation can either be part of the content-related 
processing style as described in the previous section or it can be used in the way the model 
describes— namely, as a final conclusion of the viewing process. Thus, the model seems to be 
correct in stating that in the last stage of viewing, people end with meaning-making, which can be 
an in- terpretation of the work and an aesthetic judgment or an aesthetic emotional reaction. In 
terms of the aesthetic development model from Housen (2007), it should be apparent that her 
“Interpretive” stage (Stage IV) is connected to our theme of interpretation and that both reflect 
an interpretation of the artwork. Stage V, the “Re-Creative” stage of Housen (2007), involves 
engaging with a particular artwork multiple times and with art in general over a longer period of 
time. Therefore, it is apparent that our results that only apply to a one-time viewing of a work 
might not directly speak of this stage. However, it can be postulated that such extended engagement 
with art could lead to a deeper level of processing across the stages of the Mirror Model.

Discussion
The results of Study 1 suggest that the model is a relatively good reflection of how people 
naturally process art. Our findings show that conscious report on automatic visual processing is 
increas- ingly difficult when there is a lower level of visual detail, which leads to fewer 
instances of these themes being reported in the laboratory setting (fewer visual details) as 
compared with the museum setting (more visual details). Our findings also show a correspondence 
with earlier research, in particular that of Cupchik

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?
271


and Laszlo (1992), who showed that naïve viewers demonstrate a content-related processing style and 
expert viewers a more style- focused processing style. This is in line with the Mirror Model, which 
assumes that both could take place in Stage II.
We have introduced the concept of a motivation to understand to explain this finding. Participants 
are motivated to know what they are looking at when viewing an artwork, and they use the resources 
available to them to reach a level of understanding. Therefore, participants in the museum context 
will use the external art knowl- edge available to them and participants in the laboratory will use 
their own personal memories. Although the model describes these processes as happening in Stage II, 
our findings provide evidence that participants seem to loop through Stages II and III in their 
attempt to understand the work. Although the model does not exclude the possibility of people 
moving back and forth through the stages, it would be an improvement if this process could be made 
explicit (such as in the model of Leder et al., 2004). This does not necessarily mean that the 
general “flow” of the model from Stage I to Stage III is incorrect, but instead that people do not 
always follow this structure in a linear fashion. Furthermore, this concept of looping should also 
be implemented in the art-making side of the model. It is likely that such a loop could also be 
found during art production. As artists expand and adapt their work in Stage II of the model, it is 
likely that they revisit the first stage where they developed their initial idea and theme for the 
work as they proceeded along. Because the model describes a correspon- dence between the art-making 
and art-viewing processes, this loop would have to be implemented in both sides of the model.
In addition, it would seem appropriate if the Mirror Model were to explicitly include what we have 
called a motivation to under- stand. This motivation to understand is a central tenet of the effort 
after meaning theory by Russell (2003). It is already implicit in the Mirror Model and in similar 
models in the literature. For example, the model by Leder et al. (2004) includes the notion that 
exposure to art provides the perceiver with a challenging situation to clas- sify, understand, and 
cognitively master. However, the model does not explicitly incorporate the notion of motivation. 
One way to explicitly incorporate this idea is to acknowledge the presence of a “first glance” in 
which people take in the artwork. In general, people who are in a museum will glance at many art 
pieces but will only stop and look at a couple of works for a longer period of time. This decision 
to stop and look at a work can be seen as people being motivated to understand the work, or in 
terms of the Leder et al. (2004) model, to engage with the challenge before them and go through all 
of the stages of the art-viewing process (see also Smith & Smith, 2001). Thus, this first glance is 
a prestage, in which only people motivated to understand will proceed and will complete the entire 
art-viewing process as described by aesthetic experience models (e.g., Leder et al., 2004; Tinio, 
2013). This notion of a first glance or a two-stage process of art viewing is not new, and a review 
of the evidence for this two-stage process of art perception can be found in Locher (2015). In 
terms of the Mirror Model, it seems likely that Stage I would represent this first glance because 
it involves the early and automatic processes that can occur in a mere glance at an artwork. As for 
the art production part of the Mirror Model, it seems fitting to assume that just as viewers glance 
at many different artworks and only look at a few, artists have many different ideas, but only a 
few could be worked on at any given time. Therefore, one can draw a parallel between the
glances of the viewer that are “discarded” or “set aside” (purpose- fully or not) and the ideas of 
the artist that are subjected to similar outcomes.
Finally, in Study 1, we found that although interpretation can be part of a content-related 
processing approach, it can also be used in the way the model describes—namely, as a final 
conclusion of the viewing experience. Thus, the model seems to be correct in stating that in the 
last stage of viewing, people end with meaning- making.
Using qualitative methodology in both museum and laboratory contexts, Study 1 has given us a deep 
understanding of the extent to which the Mirror Model reflects how people naturally process art. 
However, the study did not directly address our second main question of whether presenting 
information in a way that corre- sponds to the model has benefits for art viewers. This question 
was investigated in Study 2.

Study 2

Method
Participants.  Study 2 included 130 participants. Seven par- ticipants (5%) were excluded because 
of procedural reasons such as failure to complete the dependent measures or ignoring task 
instructions. Therefore, we had 123 participants in total (42 males, 78 females, 3 unreported 
gender; Mean agemuseum = 38.9 years, SD = 15.7 and Mean agelaboratory = 20.7 years, SD = 2.9). 
Sixty of these participants were tested in the laboratory and the other 63 in the museum. As with 
Study 1, laboratory participants were students at Montclair State University who received course 
credit for their participation. Museum participants were visitors to the Queens Museum. The 
recruitment procedure was the same as in Study 1.
Procedure.  Study 2 used a 2 (model-consistent order vs. model-inconsistent order) × 2 (museum vs. 
laboratory context) design. Participants were presented with information about the painting through 
an audio guide. In the model-consistent order condition, information was structured to correspond 
to the struc- ture that the model describes. In the model-inconsistent order condition, information 
was structured to follow the opposite or- der.³ Museum participants listened to the audio guide 
while look- ing at the artwork used in Study 1 (The Senate by William Gropper, c. 1950) whereas 
laboratory participants listened to the same audio guide while looking at a high-resolution 
reproduction of the artwork presented on a computer monitor. After viewing the artwork, both groups 
completed the aesthetic experience question- naire and the art expertise questionnaire. They then 
reported de- mographic information and finally completed the information re- tention task.⁴
Materials.  To measure aesthetic experience, we used an adapted version of the Aesthetic Experience 
Scale (Silvia & Nus- baum, 2011). The original scale asked participants to report how often they 
had experienced each of the 10 items (e.g., “feel absorbed and immersed”) for a specific aesthetic 
category (e.g.,

³ The full text of the audio guide for both conditions is included in the
Appendix.
⁴ All participants also completed a mix-and-match task the results, of which will be reported 
elsewhere.

272                      SPECKER, TINIO, AND VAN ELK


“listening to music”). In our adapted version, we asked participants to rate, on a 7-point scale 
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much), the extent to which they experienced each of the 
items (e.g., “feel absorbed and immersed”) while looking at the artwork. The scale was reliable 
with α= .86.
To assess information retention, participants answered 10 ques- tions with regard to the 
information they received via the audio guide. Questions were yes-or-no questions assessing if 
people remembered specific pieces of information. An example is “Do you remember that the artwork 
was oil on canvas?” Some of the questions asked about information people did not receive (foils) to 
assess real information retention and not response biases toward answering “yes.” In the task 
instructions, people were informed that some of the statements might be false. These items were 
reverse scored before the analysis. Art expertise was measured in the same way as in Study 1 using 
the Aesthetic Fluency Scale (Smith & Smith, 2006). All of these scales can be found in the 
Appendix.

Results
For all analyses, mean scores were entered for the dependent variables, information retention and 
aesthetic experience, and for the art expertise covariate. Our laboratory sample did not vary from 
our museum sample in gender (p > .05); however, the two samples did differ in age (p < .05). 
Therefore, we added age as a covariate in all of our analyses. We conducted two two-way analyses of 
covariance (ANCOVAs) to investigate the effects of model order and context on the two dependent 
variables. In the first analysis, we investigated the effects of model order (consis- tent vs. 
inconsistent) and context (museum vs. laboratory) on aesthetic experience while controlling for art 
expertise and age. One participant, who was identified as an extreme outlier (score >2 times the 
upper quartile), was excluded. Results showed a significant main effect of context, F(4, 115)⁵ = 
4.69, p = .03,
 ² = .04. Participants in the museum (M = 3.7) scored higher on aesthetic experience than 
participants in the laboratory (M = 3.1). There was no effect of model order, F(4, 115) = 2.32, p = 
.13,
 ² = .02, and consistent with our hypothesis, there was no inter- action between model order and 
context, F(4, 115) = .17, p = .68,
 ² = .002. A plot of these results is found in Figure 3, left panel. In the second analysis, we 
investigated the effects of model order (consistent vs. inconsistent) and context (museum vs. labo- 
ratory) on information retention while controlling for art expertise and age. There was no effect 
of model order, F(4, 117) = 1.34, p = .25, ² = .01, or context, F(4, 117) = 3.41, p = .07, ² = .03.
However, there was a significant interaction between model order and context, F(4, 117) = 5.98, p < 
.05, ² = .05. Participants in the museum remembered more information in the model- consistent 
condition (M = .77) than in the model-inconsistent condition (M = .75). Participants in the 
laboratory remembered more information in the model-inconsistent condition (M = .75) than in the 
model-consistent condition (M = .66). A plot of these results is found in Figure 3, right panel.

Discussion
Our hypotheses about the effects of model order (model- consistent vs. model-inconsistent) and 
context (museum vs. labo-









Figure 3.  Results of two-way ANCOVAs. Left panel shows results of the two-way ANCOVA for the 
dependent variable aesthetic experience. Right panel shows results of the two-way ANCOVA for the 
dependent variable information retention. Both plots have the condition (consistent vs. incon- 
sistent model order) that participants were in on the x-axis, the dependent measure on the y-axis, 
and separate lines for the context (laboratory vs. museum) that participants were in. Error bars in 
both plots reflect standard errors. Note that the minimum value of aesthetic experience is 1 with a 
maximum of 7. For information retention, the minimum is 0 and the maximum is 1.


ratory) on aesthetic experience and information retention were partly supported. As expected, there 
was a significant effect of context on aesthetic experience, with people in the museum having more 
enhanced aesthetic experience than people in the laboratory. This contributes to the existing 
evidence showing that viewing artworks in a museum context generally leads to enhanced aes- thetic 
experiences (Brieber et al., 2014; Kirk, Skov, Hulme, Chris- tensen, & Zeki, 2009; Locher et al., 
1999; Tinio, Smith, & Smith, 2014). This finding may be qualified by the fact that context and the 
way the art was presented (genuine artwork vs. reproduction) were confounded. It seems appropriate 
to assume that part of this effect is due to seeing the genuine artwork instead of the repro- 
duction. However, in Kirk et al.’s (2009) study, context was manipulated by the use of labels 
alone, which suggests that the museum context does matter in and of itself and that a difference 
between the genuine artwork and reproduction cannot fully explain this effect.
The lack of an effect of model order on aesthetic experience may be explained through Russell’s 
(2003) effort after meaning theory, which proposes that giving participants information that helps 
in the interpretation of an artwork makes the painting more meaningful and enhances the hedonic 
value of the artwork. In Study 2, participants in both conditions received the same infor- mation. 
Merely receiving this information alone may have en- hanced participants’ aesthetic experiences, 
which may have can- celled out the more subtle effects of information structure.
Interestingly, and contrary to our hypothesis, there was an interaction effect between model order 
and context on information retention. This interaction reflects the idea that presenting infor- 
mation in a model-consistent order helps people remember the information better (i.e., when they 
are in a museum). For people in the laboratory, presenting information in a model-inconsistent 
order helps them remember the information better. What seems to be driving this effect is that 
information retention is especially low for laboratory participants in the model-consistent 
condition. This finding is best explained by the fact that laboratory participants

⁵ Differences in degrees of freedom between statistical tests and the total
N of our sample are due to missing data.

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?
273


saw a reproduction of the artwork that is inherently lower in visual detail than the genuine 
artwork seen by the participants in the museum. Because the audio guide in the model-consistent 
order begins with a description of the visual details of the work, these details were less clearly 
visible to the laboratory participants. The audio guide also mentions that the work did not have a 
finishing varnish, which makes the work look heavily textured and rough. For laboratory 
participants, this information may have seemed less relevant because they were not able to see such 
details mentioned in the audio guide. This is in line with embodied theories of cognition, 
according to which memories are consolidated better when information can be grounded to concrete 
visual experiences (Joy & Sherry, 2003; Wilson, 2002). However, for museum par- ticipants, this 
information may have been especially interesting because they have been made aware of details that 
they have initially processed automatically. This interaction between context and information 
retention is also consistent with one of the key findings in Study 1—that there is a low level of 
report, among laboratory participants, on themes that correspond to the first stage of the 
aesthetic experience, the stage associated with automatic processing of visual details. Because 
museum participants were able to explicitly experience visual details, the model-consistent order 
of presenting information had a positive effect on informa- tion retention. This is consistent with 
the first hypothesis—namely, that presenting information in the correct order leads participants to 
remember information better.

General Discussion
Both studies contribute to our understanding of the Mirror Model and the aesthetic experience of 
art, but in different ways. The first study showed that the model is a relatively good reflec- tion 
of how people naturally process art. Furthermore, it indicates points of improvement for the model. 
The two main points of improvement would be to include the concept of a motivation to understand 
that is related to the first glance and to explicitly incorporate the process of moving back and 
forth through the stages of the model. Although aesthetic experience models (e.g., Leder et al., 
2004) explicitly incorporate this possibility, no re- search to date has been done to directly test 
this. Therefore, it is essential that more research is conducted to investigate this further and to 
replicate our findings.
The second study showed that presenting information in a manner that is consistent with the model 
may be dependent on the manner in which artworks are presented, at least in terms of how much 
information about the artworks people are able to remember. What seems to be driving this effect is 
that information retention is especially low for laboratory participants in the model- consistent 
condition. When information is presented in a model- consistent way, the visual details in a work 
are addressed first. Because these visual details are inherently less discernable in a reproduction 
(vs. a genuine artwork), people may be more likely to disengage with the information they are 
hearing and thus remem- ber less. This finding has implications for art-related education. 
Art-related education could occur in the museum (e.g., during guided tours or school field trips) 
and outside of the museum (e.g., during art education classes in school). Our findings suggest that 
it is especially important to consider the way information is struc-
tured when art-related education happens outside of the museum. However, further research is needed 
to characterize this finding.
Study 2 also replicated the results of previous studies by finding that experiencing art in a 
museum (vs. a laboratory) enhances aesthetic experience. However, future research should tease 
apart context and presentation setting as much as possible to investigate the unique contribution 
of each. Nonetheless, this finding does suggest that regardless of technical advances such as 
Google Art Project, which lets you virtually visit museums, there is really nothing like going to a 
museum.

References
American Alliance of Museums. (n.d.). Museum facts. Retrieved from 
http://www.aam-us.org/about-museums/facts
Augustin, D., & Leder, H. (2006). Art expertise: A study of concepts and conceptual spaces. 
Psychology Science, 48, 135–156.
Brieber, D., Nadal, M., Leder, H., & Rosenberg, R. (2014). Art in time and space: Context modulates 
the relation between art experience and view- ing time. PLoS ONE, 9, e99019. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone
.0099019
Chatterjee, A. (2004). Prospects for a neuroscience of visual aesthetics.
Bulletin of the Psychology of the Arts, 4, 55– 60. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/e514602010-003
Chatterjee, A. (2010). Neuroaesthetics: A coming of age story, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
23, 53– 62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010
.21457
Cupchik, G. C., & Laszlo, J. (Eds.). (1992). Emerging visions of the aesthetic process: Psychology, 
semiology, and philosophy. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Housen, A. (2007). Art viewing and aesthetic development: Designing for the viewer. In P. 
Villeneuve (Ed.), From periphery to center: Art museum education in the 21st century (pp. 172–179). 
Reston, VA: National Art Education Association.
Joy, A., & Sherry, J. F., Jr. (2003). Speaking of art as embodied imagina- tion: A multisensory 
approach to understanding aesthetic experience. Journal of Consumer Research, 30, 259 –282. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/
376802
Kirk, U., Skov, M., Hulme, O., Christensen, M. S., & Zeki, S. (2009). Modulation of aesthetic value 
by semantic context: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 44, 1125–1132. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage
.2008.10.009
Leder, H., Belke, B., Oeberst, A., & Augustin, D. (2004). A model of aesthetic appreciation and 
aesthetic judgments. British Journal of Psy- chology, 95, 489 –508. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1348/0007126042369811
Leder, H., & Nadal, M. (2014). Ten years of a model of aesthetic appre- ciation and aesthetic 
judgments: The aesthetic episode—Developments and challenges in empirical aesthetics. British 
Journal of Psychology, 105, 443– 464. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12084
Locher, P. J. (2015). The aesthetic experience with visual art “at first glance”. In P. F. 
Bundgaard & F. Stjernfelt (Eds.), Investigations into the phenomenology and the ontology of the 
work of art (pp. 75– 88). New York, NY: Springer. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14090-2_5
Locher, P., Overbeeke, K., & Wensveen, S. (2010). Aesthetic interactions: A framework. Design 
Issues, 26, 70 –79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/ DESI_a_00017
Locher, P., Smith, L., & Smith, J. (1999). Original paintings versus slide and computer 
reproductions: A comparison of viewer responses. Empir- ical Studies of the Arts, 17, 121–129. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/R1WN- TAF2-376D-EFUH
Russell, P. A. (2003). Effort after meaning and the hedonic value of paintings. British Journal of 
Psychology, 94, 99 –110. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1348/000712603762842138

274                      SPECKER, TINIO, AND VAN ELK


Silvia, P. J., & Nusbaum, E. C. (2011). On personality and piloerection: Individual differences in 
aesthetic chills and other unusual aesthetic experiences. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts, 5, 208 – 214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021914
Smith, J. K., & Smith, L. F. (2001). Spending time on art. Empirical Studies of the Arts, 19, 229 
–236. http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/5MQM- 59JH-X21R-JN5J
Smith, J. K., & Wolf, L. F. (1996). Museum visitor preferences and intentions in constructing 
aesthetic experience. Poetics, 24, 219 –238. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-422X(95)00006-6
Smith, J. K., Wolf, L. F., & O’Brien, J. (1996). A study of visitors to the Picasso and portraiture 
exhibition. New York, NY: The Museum of Modern Art.
Smith, L. F., & Smith, J. K. (2006). The nature and growth of aesthetic fluency. In P. Locher, C. 
Martindale, & L. Dorfman (Eds.), New direc- tions in aesthetics, creativity, and the arts (pp. 
47–58). Amityville, NY: Baywood.
Stoker, W. (2008). The Rothko chapel paintings and the urgency of the transcendent experience. 
International Journal for Philosophy of
Religion,  64,  89 –102.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11153-008-91 65-x
Tinio, P. P. L. (2013). From artistic creation to aesthetic reception: The mirror model of art. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 7, 265–275. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030872
Tinio, P. P. L., Smith, J. K., & Smith, L. F. (2014). The walls do speak: Psychological aesthetics 
and the museum experience. In P. P. L. Tinio &
J. K. Smith (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of the psychology of aesthetics and the arts (pp. 195–218). 
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Vartanian, O. (2014). Empirical aesthetics: Hindsight and foresight. In
P. P. Tinio & J. K. Smith (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of the psychology of aesthetics and the 
arts (pp. 6 –34). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bul- letin & Review, 9, 625– 636. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03196322 Winston, A. S., & Cupchik, G. C. (1992). The evaluation of 
high art and
popular art by naïve and experienced viewers. Visual Arts Research, 18,
1–14.



Appendix
Detailed Procedure and Materials


Audio Guide Text
Version 1 (inconsistent model order) .  This painting, entitled “The Senate,” was made by William 
Gropper circa 1950. In this work, Gropper is trying to express his frustration with legislation 
passed by the U.S. Senate. Gropper was sent by Vanity Fair to observe the U.S. Senate in 1936. 
Afterward, he began portraying his frustration with the legislation that they passed. The work you 
are looking at now is one of a series of paintings depicting the senate. The work deals with themes 
such as injustice and the failure of democracy.
These themes are reflected in the stylistic aspects of the work (for example, in the use of extreme 
gestures and postures). These are most pronounced in the hands of the figures. For example, in the 
left of the picture, there is a man whispering to another man. The size of his hand is exaggerated, 
and the man next to the person he’s whispering to has his hand twisted in an unnatural position, 
which would be hard to achieve in real life. This emphasizes the lack of engagement this figure 
feels with what is going on in the picture. Similarly, the man to the right of the speaker is 
sitting slumped on his desk. His elbows are sharply edged, making the slump feel bigger, again 
emphasizing a lack of engagement. The general composition follows a curved line, starting from the 
man slumped on his desk toward the lower left corner of the picture, creating a sense as if the 
figures could fall out of the picture
plane— essentially “pulling the carpet out from underneath.” Sty- listically, the painting is 
expressionistic.
Gropper uses garish colors and harsh lighting to create a sense of estrangement and a general 
sickening feeling. For example, when you look at the carpet in the right corner of the painting, 
Gropper has used a lot of brushstrokes and layering of colors. The carpet inspires a dizzy and 
sickening feeling, which is also illus- trated by the green faces of the figures. Even though the 
work is oil on canvas, there are no smooth planes in the picture nor is there a varnish finish, 
which results in the work looking heavily textured and rough.
Version 2 (consistent model order).  This painting, entitled “The Senate,” was made by William 
Gropper circa 1950. It is an oil on canvas painting. Even though the work is oil on canvas, if you 
look at the painting you will see that there are no smooth planes in the picture nor is there a 
varnish finish, which results in the work looking heavily textured and rough. This is also created 
by the use of color and application of the brushstrokes For exam- ple, when you look at the carpet 
in the right corner of the painting, Gropper has used a lot of brushstrokes and layering of colors. 
The carpet inspires a dizzy and sickening feeling, which is also illus- trated by the green faces 
of the figures. Gropper uses garish colors and harsh lighting to create a sense of estrangement and 
a general sickening feeling.




(Appendix continues)

DO YOU SEE WHAT I SEE?
275


Stylistically, the painting is expressionistic. The general composition follows a curved line, 
starting from the man slumped on his desk in the upper right corner toward the lower left corner of 
the picture, creating a sense as if the figures could fall out of the picture plane— essentially 
“pulling the carpet out from underneath.” Another stylistic reoccurring feature is the use of 
extreme gestures and postures. These are most pro- nounced in the hands of the figures. For 
example, in the left of the picture, there is a man whispering to another man. The size of his hand 
is exaggerated, and the man next to the person he’s whispering to has his hand twisted in an 
unnatural position, which would be hard to achieve in real life. This emphasizes the lack of 
engagement this figure feels with what is going on in the picture. Similarly, the man to the right 
of the speaker is sitting slumped on his desk. His elbows are sharply edged, making the slump feel 
bigger, again emphasizing a lack of engagement.
Together, these formal features such as exaggerated poses and garish colors are used by Gropper to 
express his frustration with legislation passed by the U.S. Senate, which is the general theme of 
the work. Gropper was sent by Vanity Fair to observe the U.S. Senate in 1936. Afterward, he began 
portraying his frustration with the legislation that they passed. The work you are looking at now 
is one of a series of paintings depicting the senate. The work deals with themes such as injustice 
and the failure of democracy.

Aesthetic Fluency Scale
How much do you know about the following artists/art ideas:

• 0 —I have never heard of this artist or term

• 1—I have heard of this but do not really know anything about it

• 2—I have a vague idea of what this is

• 3—I understand this artist or idea when it is discussed

• 4 —I can talk intelligently about this artist or idea in art

• Mary Cassatt

• Isamu Noguchi

• John Singer Sargent

• Alessandro Boticelli

• Gian Lorenzo Bernini

• Fauvism

• Funerary Stelae

• Impressionism

• Chinese Scrolls

• Abstract Expressionism
Aesthetic Experience Scale
When looking at the artwork to what extent did you . . . 
• . . . feel absorbed and immersed
• . . . completely lose track of time
• . . . feel chills down your spine
• . . . get goose bumps
• . . . feel like you’re somewhere else
• . . . feel like your hair is standing on end
• . . . feel like crying
• . . . feel touched
• . . . feel detached from your surroundings
• . . . feel a sense of awe and wonder
Note: All items are rated on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much).

Information Retention Questionnaire
Instructions: You have listened to an audio clip telling you about the artwork. Below are 
statements about the artwork. For each statement, please indicate whether you remember hearing the 
statement or not. Please note that some of the statements were presented in the audio clip while 
some were not. Mark your answer by circling “yes” or “no.”
Do you remember that . . . 

1.   the painting is oil on canvas yes/no

2   the style of the painting is Impressionistic yes/no

3.   Gropper was sent by Vanity Fair to observe the U.S.
Senate yes/no

4   the composition of the artwork forms a triangle
shape yes/no

5.    examples of stylistic features in the painting are
exaggerated hands and postures yes/no

6.   the painting is part of a series of artworks depicting
the U.S. Senate yes/no

7   the painting celebrates the workings of the U.S.
Senate yes/no

8.   Gropper uses garish colors and harsh lighting yes/no

9. . . . the artwork deals with themes such as injustice yes/no

10   in the painting, Gropper uses few brushstrokes and
colors yes/no

Note: All bolded items are reverse-scored items.

Received July 18, 2016
Revision received October 21, 2016
Accepted October 27, 2016 ■
