Interactive user modeling for personalized access to museum
collections : the Rijksmuseum case study

Citation for published version (APA):

Wang, Y., Aroyo, L. M., Stash, N., & Rutledge, L. W. (2007). Interactive user 
modeling for personalized access
to museum collections : the Rijksmuseum case study. In C. Conati, K. F. McCoy, 
& G. Paliouras (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on User Modeling 2007 (UM 
2007) 25-29 June 2007, Corfu,
Greece  (pp. 385-389). (Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 4511). 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
540-73078-1_50

DOI:

10.1007/978-3-540-73078-1_50

Document status and date:

Published: 01/01/2007

Document Version:

Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue 
and volume numbers)

Please check the document version of this publication:

• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and 
before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published 
version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final 
version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.

• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication 
after peer review.

• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including 
the volume, issue and page
numbers.

Link to publication

General rights

Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public 
portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide 
by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public 
portal for the purpose of private study or research.

• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making 
activity or commercial gain

• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public 
portal.

If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch 
Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:

www.tue.nl/taverne

Take down policy

If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:

openaccess@tue.nl

providing details and we will investigate your claim.

Download date: 24. דצמ. 2021


Interactive User Modeling for Personalized Access to
Museum Collections: The Rijksmuseum Case Study

Yiwen Wang¹, Lora M. Aroyo², Natalia Stash¹, and Lloyd Rutledge³

¹ Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands

{y.wang,n.v.stash}@tue.nl

² Free University Amsterdam, The Netherlands

l.m.aroyo@cs.vu.nl

3 Telematica Institute, Enschede, The Netherlands
CWI Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Lloyd.Rutledge@cwi.nl

Abstract. In this paper we present an approach for personalized access to
museum collections. We use a RDF/OWL specification of the Rijksmuseum
Amsterdam collections as a driver for an interactive dialog. The user gives
his/her judgment on the artefacts, indicating likes or dislikes. The elicited 
user
model is further used for generating recommendations of artefacts and topics. In
this way we support exploration and discovery of information in museum
collections. A user study provided insights in characteristics of our target 
user
group, and showed how novice and expert users employ their background
knowledge and implicit interest in order to elicit their art preference in the
museum collections.

Keywords: CHIP (Cultural Heritage Information Presentation), user study,
adaptive system, personalization, RDF/OWL, recommendations, user modeling.

1 Introduction

The CHIP¹ project is part of the Dutch Science Foundation funded program CATCH
for Continuous Access to Cultural Heritage. Since early 2005 the CHIP research 
team
has been working at the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam and interviewed curators and
collection managers in order to perform detailed analysis of the museum domain,
target users and museum web applications. As a result of this extensive domain 
and
context analysis requirements were obtained for the development of several low-
fidelity prototypes [1]. The prototypes focused on eliciting information from 
domain
experts about novel personalization functions for the visitors on the museum 
web site.
We proposed an approach based on an interactive semantics-driven dialog for
eliciting user knowledge, inspired from previous work on the adaptive learning
content management system SWALE [2].

¹ CHIP project: http://www.chip-project.org

C. Conati, K. McCoy, and G. Paliouras (Eds.): UM 2007, LNAI 4511, pp. 385–389, 
2007.

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007


In this paper, we present the results of a user study with real users 
evaluating our
first functional prototype. The results show that novices need support in
externalizing their implicit art preferences and thus profit from the CHIP 
adaptive
dialog. The experts, on the other hand, have prior knowledge and use the 
interactive
dialog in order to discover new insights and semantic relationships in 
particular
collections. The ultimate goal for our research is to realize ‘the Virtual New
Rijksmuseum” where different types of users can easily find their ways in the
Rijksmuseum and access information which is tailored to their needs, personal
interests and competency level.

2 Personalization in Museum Collections

In the last few years, dedicated recommender systems have gained popularity and
become more and more established practice in online commerce, like purchasing of
books, music, and organizing a travel. Museums also direct their efforts to 
provide
personalized services to the general audience via their websites. There are 
various
examples of museum websites attempting to meet the needs of individual users. A 
key
problem here is the semantic vocabulary gap between the experts-created 
descriptions
and the implicit and often not domain-related art preferences of end users. 
Moreover,
museum collections maintain multiple perspectives for their information 
disclosure.
These challenges lend themselves well to the application of recommender 
technology
as explored in this work. Our goal is to bridge the vocabulary gap and provide 
a user-
driven approach for eliciting user’s preferences and characteristics, and 
recommend
known/new information from the collection in a coherent and comprehensive way.
Studies show that understanding is stimulated when the systems use concepts 
familiar
to the user (considering interests and knowledge level) [3]. In this paper, we 
capitalize
on the non-obtrusive collection of users data as part of an active interaction 
with the
museum collection (versus filling in static isolated preference forms).

3 Cultural Heritage Information Presentation


Fig. 1. CHIP interactive user modeling interface

We developed an interactive quiz to
help users find artefacts and topics of
their interests in the Rijksmuseum
collection. Figure 1 gives a snapshot
of its user interface. On the top-left
artefacts to rate are presented as an
interactive dialog. The ratings are
stored in a user profile (top-right) and
are used to filter the relevant artefacts
(bottom-right) and topics (bottom-
left).  Each  recommendation  is
accompanied  with  an  explanation
(‘why?’ option). The demo collects


feedback  about  the  recommended  items  by  allowing  users  to  rate  also
recommendations. In this way the system gradually builds the user profile to be 
used
for personalized tours generation. The user profile we build is an extended 
overlay of
the CHIP domain model depicted in Figure 2. It contains topics and artefacts of
interest assessed in a five-star scale (respectively -1, -0.5, 0, 0.5 1), where 
1 is
maximum interest, -1 is maximum distaste and 0 is neutral. The topics are 
grouped in
four main categories, i.e. artist, theme, period-location and style.

The rich semantic modeling of the domain with mappings to common vocabularies
(Getty vocabularies² and Iconclass thesaurus³) and use of open standards (e.g. 
VRA,
SKOS and OWL/RDF), allows us to maintain a light-weight user profile and 
efficiently
perform the reasoning over the domain model. This allows for a dynamic and 
run-time
calculation of the user’s interest, as well as a high-level of serendipity of 
the suggested
items and explanations. We also store the skipped (not rated, but presented 
items), in
order to optimize the presentation sequence. We use XSLT to convert the XML of 
the
Rijksmuseum database into the RDF scheme we developed. Much of this
transformation derives from the taxonomical merging resulting in two types of 
new

triples: (1) equivalence - identifies
concepts across taxonomies that are
the same; (2) narrower and broader
terms - defines local extensions
within hierarchical taxonomies.

Figure 2 shows our current
RDF data model, representing
these  vocabularies/thesauruses.
The initial RDF representation was
provided by the E-Culture project
(for Getty) [4] and the STITCH


Fig. 2. CHIP RDF data model

project (for IconClass) [5].

4 User Study at the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam

Based on our first recommender prototype, we did a first formative user study 
with two-
fold focus: (1) to test with real users the effectiveness of the demo with 
respect to novices
and experts; and (2) to gain insight in characteristics of the target group in 
order to elicit

requirements  for  the  user


Step1    Step2    Step3    Step4    Step5

modeling scheme and approach.
The rationale of this study ⁴ is


Qb   Pre-test

properties

Test

topics

Post-test

properties

Qu

illustrated in Figure 3. It contains

five steps: Step 2–4 focus on
testing the effectiveness of CHIP
demo. Step 1 and 5 are two


Comparision I  Comparision II

Fig. 3. Rationale of the user study

additional questionnaires about
users’ background and usability
issues of the CHIP demo.

² Getty vocabularies: 
http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/

³ Iconclass thesauru: http://www.iconclass.nl/libertas/ic?style=index.xsl

⁴ CHIP user study: http://www.chip-project.org:8091/demoUserStudy/


To test the demo, we designed a novel method to compare the process of rating 
and
recommendation of experts and novices while using the demo. We claim that the
CHIP recommender helps novices to elicit art preferences from their implicit
knowledge/interest in museum collections. To test it, we let users rate their 
interest in
art-related properties before and after using the demo. Here, it is called 
‘pre-test’,
‘test’ and ‘post-test’, which refer to step 2 to 4 in Figure 3. In consultation 
with the
Rijksmuseum domain experts, the demo used a selected data source which covered 
37
properties from 4 popular artefacts. These properties are randomly divided into 
two
questionnaires, pre-test and post-test, in a non-overlapping way. Users assess 
each
property on a five-degree scale from ‘not interested at all’ to ‘very 
interested'. The
main idea was to measure whether the properties generated as recommended topics
from the demo match the properties positively rated by the users in the 
pre-test and
post-test questionnaires. This measure of discrepance is expressed in 
Comparision I
and Comparision II, see buttom Figure 3.

To gain insight in our target users, we designed two additional questionnaires, 
one
about the users’ background (e.g. age, education, interest in art, etc.) and 
another
about usability issues of the demo, see Qb and Qu in step 1 and 5 in Figure 3.

In total 39 users participated in this study that was held in a period of two 
weeks in
August 2006 at the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam. 33 users were randomly selected from
the actual visitors of the museum. In addition, we also asked 6 employees (no 
domain
experts) of the Rijksmuseum to take part in the study.

5 Results and Analysis of the User Study

In the questionnaires, we collected user characteristics (e.g. age, gender, 
profession)
and comments on the demo usability. Some dominant factors appeared as
characteristics of the users:

-  Small group with 2-4 persons and a male took the leading role (67%)

-  Mid-age people in 30-60 years old and well educated (62%)

-  No prior knowledge about the Rijksmuseum collections (62%)

-  Visit the museum for education (98%) and strong interest in art (92%)

-  Recommendations are useful (82%) and explanations is helpful (57%)

These findings guide our subsequent user-centered design of personalized 
adaptive
systems: (1) consider community/social aspects in the user model, (2) enable
collaborative tasks among users, (3) not explicitly test user’s pre-knowledge, 
and (4)
no   need to motivate users but focus on providing art education in a pleasant 
way.

To distinguish within these 39 participants between novices and experts, we
roughly defined an expert-value as a weighted sum of five factors: prior 
knowledge of
the Rijksmuseum collection (v1), visiting frequency of Rijksmuseum (v2) and 
other
museums (v3), interest in art (v4) and history (v5), calculated by:

expert-value = V1*0.5 + (V2+V3)*0.15 + (V4+V5)*0.1

If the user’s expert-value is higher than a particular threshold (2.5), then 
she will
be idenitfied as an expert, otherwise as a novice. However, there is no sharp
distinction between them. To establish the correspondence of properties 
collected
from pre/post-test (Pp) and the actual test (Tp), we use a valuation function V 
to
obtain values in the range of -1, 0 and 1, that we can compare (when both 
values have


a similar sign there is a positive correspondence), as expressed in the 
formula: Cp =
V(Pp)*V(Tp). For a particular user, we derive a combined positive 
correspondence,
over all properties P, by applying: ΣC = ΣCp. At this point, we do not consider
negative correspondences, as they seemed not to contain valuable information. By
using this interpretation model, all data from the pre/post-test and test were 
processed.

In Figure 4 (left
part), we show the
comparison of ΣC
based  on two groups:
novices and experts.
A significant increase,
1.18, was found for
novices when relating
Comparison I and II.


Fig. 4. ΣC in Comparison I and II according to user expert-value

Besides, we found a
very slight increase,

0.23, for the experts. Secondly, when we plot the difference of ΣC between
comparison I and II on a continuous range of the expert-value, we may observe 
(right
part, Figure 4), ignoring extreme values, a convergence as expert level 
increases.
These results confirmed our hypothesis that the novices indeed profit from using
demo to elicit their art preferences in the Rijksmuseum collections.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have presented a user study of the CHIP demo, indicating that
personalized adaptive systems have the potential to benefit users in various 
contexts.
It is well integrated in the tasks users expect to perform on a museum website, 
and in
the same time gathers necessary data about the users in order to provide 
personalized
information access and presentation. It is geared towards user’s 
characteristics and
behaviors, and it can make the active interaction more effective and fruitful.

References

1. Rutledge, L., Aroyo, L., Stash, N.: Determining User Interests About Museum 
Collections.
In: Proceedings of WWW’06 International Conference (poster) (2006)

2. Denaux, R., Dimitrova, D., Aroyo, L.: Integrating Open User Modeling and 
Learning Content
Management for the Semantic Web. In: Proceedings of User Modeling Conference 
(2005)

3. Bowen, J., Filippini-Fantoni, S.: Personalization and the web from a museum 
perspective.
In: Proceedings of Museums on the Web Conference (2004)

4. Schreiber, G., Amin, A., van Assem, M., de Boer, V., Hardman, L., 
Hildebrand, M.,
Hollink, L., Huang, Z., van Kersen, J., de Niet, M., Omelayenko, B., van 
Ossenbruggen, J.,
Siebes, R., Taekema, J., Wielemaker, J., Wielinga, B.: MultimediaN E-Culture
demonstrator. In: Cruz, I., Decker, S., Allemang, D., Preist, C., Schwabe, D., 
Mika, P.,
Uschold, M., Aroyo, L. (eds.) ISWC 2006. LNCS, vol. 4273, Springer, Heidelberg 
(2006)

5. van Gendt, M., Isaac, A., van der Meij, L., Schloback, S.: Semantic Web 
Techniques for
Multiple Views on Heterogeneous Collections: A Case Study. In: Gonzalo, J., 
Thanos, C.,
Verdejo, M.F., Carrasco, R.C. (eds.) ECDL 2006. LNCS, vol. 4172, Springer, 
Heidelberg
(2006)

