Communicating Museum Collections Information Online:
Analysis of the Philosophy of Communication Extending
the Constructivist Approach

ION GIL-FUENTETAJA, University of Deusto

MARIA ECONOMOU, University of Glasgow

Cultural heritage institutions are spending considerable effort and resources 
to provide online access to their collection
catalogues and collection management systems, usually through their 
institutional websites. This improves accessibility and
supports research and engagement by diverse user groups, as well as meeting the 
increasing expectation by audiences that
this type of information will be freely and easily available online. However, 
cultural organisations have not responded to these
needs in the same way and have been employing different web tools and features 
to present their collections online. In this
article, we argue that the technological implementation choices and the type of 
content provided reflect also the philosophy
of communication of the institution itself. We used the constructivist 
approach’s learning theory and theory of knowledge
and combined these interrelated epistemological and cognitive perspectives to 
analyse the communication philosophy of a
large number of museum online catalogues. The article presents the research 
carried out initially in 2007 through 2009 and
then again in 2017, studying the provision of collections information online by 
different types of museums across Europe
and in the United States. This enabled us to establish categories of 
presentation types and study the changes over time. The
results highlighted the major shift towards participatory practices which have 
been transforming the cultural heritage world

over the past years.                                                          3

CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Evaluation; • Information systems → 
Digital libraries and archives; Users
and interactive retrieval; Collaborative and social computing systems and 
tools; • Human-centered computing → Human
computer interaction (HCI); Web-based interaction;• Applied computing → Fine 
arts; Digital libraries and archives;

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Museum online catalogues, museum digital 
collections, communication strategy, com-
munication philosophy, constructivism

The early stage of the research was performed within the wider research network 
CHIRON: Cultural Heritage Informatics Research Oriented
Network, 2004–2008, which was funded by the European Commission’s Sixth 
Framework Programme under contract no. MEST-CT-2004-
514539 and a matching funds grant from the Greek General Directorate of 
Research and Technology, 2008–2009. The later stage of the research
was partly carried out within POEM: Participatory Memory Practices European 
Training Network, funded by the European Commission’s
H2020 MSCA ITN 2017 Programme under contract no. MSCA-ITN-ETN-2018-764859.

Authors’ addresses: I. Gil-Fuentetaja, Department of Tourism, University of 
Deusto, P. Arrupe Building (231), Mundaiz 50 – 20012 Donostia

/ San Sebastian, Spain; email: iongil@deusto.es; M. Economou, Information 
Studies & The Hunterian, University of Glasgow, 11 University
Gardens, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom; email: maria.economou@glasgow.ac.uk.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.

© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
1556-4673/2019/02-ART3 $15.00

https://doi.org/10.1145/3283253


ACM Reference format:

Ion Gil-Fuentetaja and Maria Economou. 2019. Communicating Museum Collections 
Information Online: Analysis of the
Philosophy of Communication Extending the Constructivist Approach. ACM J. 
Comput. Cult. Herit. 12, 1, Article 3 (February
2019), 16 pages.

https://doi.org/10.1145/3283253

1 INTRODUCTION

Over the past two decades, an increasing number of cultural heritage 
institutions have been providing online
access to information about their collections in an effort to increase 
accessibility and support research, education,
and public engagement. This followed the wider radical changes which had 
started affecting the museum world
since the 1970s, forcing cultural organisations to shift their attention from 
their collections to their visitors.
The ‘new museology’ discourse around the social and political role of museums 
which was pushing for new
communication models and style of expression [1–3] had a significant impact 
also in the digital activities of
museums. The transformation in the cultural heritage world meant that museums 
changed from being seen as
safe-keepers of collections to gradually becoming education, information, and 
entertainment centres, expected
to provide different types of experiences to a varied audience [4–6]. 
Contemporary museums started increasingly
relying on different types of media to convey their stories while using various 
digital platforms in their exhibits,
narratives, and interactions with visitors [7, 8].

These rapid social and technological developments, particularly since the 
millennium, made cultural institu-
tions aware of the necessity of creating and maintaining a digital presence on 
the web for more wide-reaching
and effective communication. Consequently, a growing number have been investing 
considerable effort and
resources in providing access to their online digital catalogues as part of 
their web presence. To answer the
increased expectations from web users, museums have been exploring different 
ways of offering added func-
tionality and greater versatility in the provision of collections information 
on their websites [9].

This meant that they started moving beyond the provision of simple static 
webpages, offering initially textual
information from their catalogues, which was later complemented by digital 
images and other audio-visual ma-
terial. This type of online catalogue was based on the digital collections 
information system (CIS) that was used
by curators, conservators, and other specialists, or in some cases was the web 
front-end to the in-house system
without any or with minimal additional steps taken to clean up the data before 
making it publicly accessible.
CISs have more recently been called collections management systems (CMS), 
reflecting the move from the sim-
ple inventory or descriptive catalogue to a system for managing the 
collections, their intrinsic and associated
knowledge, and their movement, lending, borrowing, disposal and other related 
activities, together with their
role in creating and sharing knowledge [10]. The common assumption among 
cultural heritage institutions was
traditionally that this is a more specialised tool, complementing the general 
information provided about the col-
lections, often in the form of highlights or online exhibitions, and other 
interpretive digital materials provided
online at the websites of cultural institutions for a nonspecialist audience. 
However, assumptions of this kind
have usually not been tested with systematic research on the profile of online 
catalogue users and the way these
are being constructed by cultural institutions and used in practice by end 
users.

At the same time, the appearance and spread since the millennium of social 
media and the information and

knowledge architecture of Web 2.0 brought to the fore the idea of the 
collaborative, participatory museum [11,
12], and the shift of its role from repository to forum [13], focusing on 
communities of users actively creating
and contributing, and not just consuming, collections information [14]. 
Crowdsourcing or citizen science initia-
tives in cultural heritage have brought together communities of interested 
individuals ready to work towards a
specific aim, such as transcribing, digitising, translating, or describing 
cultural heritage content [15, 16]. These
developments have been transforming the cultural heritage sector and affecting 
museum websites and online
catalogues, yet the nature of this transformation has not been studied in 
depth.


Some early publications addressed issues related to the design and use of 
cultural websites in general (e.g.,
[17]) and their role in encouraging physical visits to the museums [18] or 
compared physical and online visits
from a theoretical perspective [19]. Other studies examined the informational 
value [20], accessibility, usability
[21], interface design, or user needs of museum websites as a whole [22, 23]. 
There has also been a lot of work
in information retrieval, interpretation of user interaction, and the 
evaluation of digital libraries in general (e.g.,
[24, 25]), but the standard evaluation benchmarks which have been developed in 
information retrieval usually
focus on a ‘single document, genre, language, media-type, and searcher 
stereotype that is radically different from
the unique content and user community of a particular digital library’ [26].

But when we want to understand and study in depth the real use and impact of 
museum websites and online
catalogues, as with any technological solution, it is important to examine the 
triangulation between three dif-
ferent actors, namely institutions, technologies, and end users, in this case 
online visitors [27]. Therefore, the
specific technological solutions or communication strategies that museums 
adopted on the web must be care-
fully analysed in relation to all actors and parameters and their complex 
interrelationships, because they have
profound consequences for the cultural organisation on the digital sphere, 
becoming the clear reflection of the
fostered philosophy of communication of the institution itself.

This article makes a significant contribution in this area because museum 
websites online collection cata-
logues have not been analysed in sufficient depth and breadth. It addresses the 
need to systematically examine
a substantial number of museum websites from different countries, in this case 
across Europe and North Amer-
ica; analyse changes over a long period of time, taking into account these 
complex interrelationships; and link
theory and practice, particularly learning and knowledge theories, to study the 
provision of online collections
information in the context of the organisation’s communication paradigm. The 
article is based on the findings
of    a research project which spanned from 2007 to 2009, funded by an FP6 
Marie Curie EST grant to investigate
the online provision of museum catalogues, the users’ profile, and pattern of 
use. This was later expanded with
additional case studies, comparing the original findings to new ones from 2017. 
This allowed the examination of
change over time—an important aspect rarely addressed in digital heritage 
research.

2 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

To comprehensively study the development and use of museum websites and online 
collections, it was necessary
to analyse both the way museums are communicating on the web and how this 
online content is consumed by
its intended audience. Therefore, the two main objectives of the research were 
to (a) study the implementation
of different web technologies and models by the cultural institutions 
themselves and analyse their underlying
communication philosophy, and (b) identify the patterns of use of these museum 
websites by online visitors.
Following this line of action, the project covered the following stages: first, 
study a large sample of online museum
catalogues from around the world to establish a typology of how the information 
was organised and presented
[28]; second, carry out an email survey with the museum staff of the 
organizations with the most complex type
of online catalogue that offered some kind of searching tool [29]; and third, 
select a small number of case studies
from this group to analyse their web access logs in depth to trace user 
profiles and usage patterns [30].

The results presented in this article relate to the first stage of the project, 
which includes a brief comparison
of the original data of 2008 with an updated analysis of the websites performed 
in late 2017. One of the most
important things to bear in mind when interpreting the results obtained during 
the two stages of analysis is their
different socio-technological juncture. Although during the 2008 analysis most 
of the technological solutions
were based on the initial static understanding of the Internet and social 
networking in cultural heritage was only
an emerging phenomenon [14, 31, 32], the second phase was carried out during a 
very different technological
reality. In fact, mobile subscriber penetration increased during that period 
from less than 40% to 67.6% of the
population worldwide, and from about 2.6 billion to 5.14 billion unique 
subscribers at the end of 2017 [33, 34].
Similarly, Internet users increased from 1.6 billion (23.5% of the world 
population) at the end of 2008 to 4.2 billion


(54.4%) at the end of 2017 [35]. Active social media unique users more than 
tripled since 2008, reaching 3.2 billion
worldwide, representing 42% of the global population [33]. Therefore, it is 
important to understand the distinct
social and technological realities that museums were facing during the two 
separate research stages.

The first step of the research process involved carrying out an extensive 
literature review, which supported the
selection and empirical evaluation of museum websites. This helped to identify 
the different models of presen-
tation of museum collections and digital catalogues. The different ways of 
presenting online collections and the
implementation of particular features were analysed in terms of the model of 
communication they represented
and the ways they supported visitors’ exploration, learning processes, and 
knowledge construction. In this pro-
cess, we hypothesised that the philosophy of communication of the institution 
would be reflected on the design
and implementation of the web technologies they selected to communicate 
contents to their audience, and we
tested this empirically with a large sample of museum websites. To answer the 
research question, this phase of
the research used critical examination of the websites by the researchers and 
did not include any qualitative data
collection about user experiences.

2.1 Theoretical Approach: Extending the Constructivist Model

Following a constructivist approach, we found it useful to define the 
communication philosophy of every in-
stitution in relation to two different but closely interrelated theoretical 
approaches, namely the learning theory
and the theory of knowledge, combining epistemological and cognitive 
perspectives [36]. According to the con-
structivist model, how learning theory is adopted by each museum delimits the 
degree of intervention of the
institution on the learning process of the individuals, with the two extreme 
perspectives when communicating
contents to the audience being complete user freedom on the one hand and 
complete institutional intervention
on the other. In the direct intervention approach, content is filtered by the 
staff and specialists of the institution,
who are the ones deciding which is the most significant or useful to make 
available to the users to support their
learning process. In other words, the model in this case is that institutions 
process the most suitable information
to improve the learning process of passive users. The opposite perspective 
which gives complete freedom to the
users, conversely, supports users in choosing themselves among all of the 
contents available at the institution
which are made freely and easily available to them. In this perspective, users 
are the ones who are selecting and
differentiating contents according to their learning needs.

Additionally, the theory of knowledge as employed by the constructivist model 
[36] was also used as another
key parameter to interpret the implementation of web technologies by museums. 
This theory identifies two main
antithetical paradigms for understanding how knowledge is perceived, which also 
underpins the way cultural
institutions are presenting their contents. On one end is the realist vision of 
the theory of knowledge which sup-
ports that knowledge exists outside the individuals and consequently can only 
be presented to users, providing
true, objective, and equal knowledge for everyone. The idealist vision of the 
theory of knowledge, on the oppo-
site side of the spectrum, affirms that knowledge is constructed by the learner 
personally or socially. Therefore,
the information presented must be processed by every individual to be 
assimilated and fit it into their conceptual
framework, which results in variations on the constructed knowledge depending 
on every individual.

George Hein, one of the main theoreticians of the constructivist museum, took 
the positioning of cultural
institutions on these learning and knowledge theory axes as key factors 
determining their philosophy of com-
munication [36]. Following the intersection of these axes, Hein identified four 
archetypical distinct theoretical
models of philosophy of communication expressed among different institutions, 
namely the didactic museum,
the discovery museum, the stimulating museum, and the constructivist museum 
(Figure 1). After being adapted
to the current study, these models can be briefly described as follows. In the 
didactic museum, which believes
in the acquisition of external knowledge, this is driven by the intervention of 
the institution through selection
and differentiation of the online content to be displayed for the users. The 
discovery museum, however, allows
users to freely acquire this external independent knowledge by providing 
several choices of navigation through


Fig. 1. Archetypical models of philosophy of communication of museums.

the presentation of extensive contents. The third model, the stimulating 
museum, fosters the construction of
knowledge by users according to their background, but this is driven mainly by 
the institutional intervention
of curators and museum staff. Finally, the constructivist museum is the one 
that allows users to freely navigate
through the contents of the institution to construct their own knowledge.

This model proposed by Hein has been widely accepted [37–44], although lately 
some updates have been sug-
gested following the evolving trends in communication and museology [42]. 
However, not all of the four afore-
mentioned models of museum communication have been implemented to the same 
extent, and most researchers
advocate for the constructivist museum model because it fits best the 
increasing influence of technologies in all
of  the processes linked to museums and their communicative and educative role 
[43].

Even though these models were originally proposed for the physical environment 
of museums, we argue that
they can also be applied to the digital sphere, and we tested their usefulness 
for the analysis of museum websites,
particularly the online presentation of the collections, and the communication 
paradigm to which these relate
[32].  At the first stages of our research analysis, we related the extremes at 
either end of the two axes to the
implementation of different features of the museum websites. In this sense, the 
degree of intervention of the
institutions on the learning process was linked to the browsable or searchable 
character of the museum online
content, as well as with the amount and type of online content provided [32]. 
Therefore, institutional intervention
which implies active selection by the institutions of the presented contents 
was understood as a museum website
with browsable collection content, whereas user freedom was related to 
searchable museum content.


Likewise, in relation to the theory of knowledge, the realist vision of 
acquiring knowledge was associated with
a model of transmission of information by museums to users who are given a 
passive role, whereas personal
construction of knowledge by the online visitors requires a broader and more 
comprehensive presentation of
information supported by the museums so that users can fit and adapt this to 
their existing mental structures
according to their needs [32].

Following the expansion of social media and participatory practices, we 
identified another model in our analy-
sis which has evolved based on the principles of the constructivist museum, the 
participatory one, in which users
are given an active contributor’s role in many processes of the institution 
[11]. In this model, institutions become
even more audience centred, a place where not only visitors can construct their 
own meaning but also where the
voice of the user informs and influences processes of the museum itself. Or, in 
other words, the museum becomes
a place of creation, sharing, and connection for visitors and content to 
improve active engagement [11].

Similar to the long-established four archetypical models of museums, this new 
participatory one can also
be identified by the specific features characterising its online communication. 
The impact of Web 2.0, and its
capacity to allow multiple interactions at large scale [45], has expanded the 
constructivist museum concept, not
only by emphasizing a more active user model but also by reinforcing its role 
in the communication processes
of the institutions themselves.

2.2 Terms and Categories Used in the Analysis

Arising from these theoretical models of museums described in the previous 
section, the empirical framework
of the research was designed to shed some light on the use of web technologies 
to communicate cultural con-
tents around the four original main constructs and an additional one for the 
more recent update of the data. To
assist the analysis, each construct has been translated into specific features 
of the institutional webs (Figure 2).1
The main parameters of institutional intervention—user freedom, acquisition of 
knowledge, and construction
of knowledge—were translated into empirical variables considering the following 
features: presentation of the
holdings, existence and type of searching tool, presentation format, and the 
presence of educational resources.

Regarding the presentation of the holdings, the variables have been designed 
from the perspective of the learn-
ing theory and consider both the amount of the collection presented and the way 
these contents are delivered.
Depending on the extent of presented content from the collection, the option 
labelled as ‘highlights’ refers to
the presentation of a selection made by the institution’s staff of part of the 
holdings, whereas ‘collections’ refers
to the largest part of them being presented.

Analysing the way contents are delivered, the related variables have also been 
designed based on the learn-
ing theory. In this sense, we made a clear distinction between ‘catalogues’ and 
‘databases’, identifying the first
ones as having a browsable character, presenting different areas, sections, or 
groupings of the collection made
by the institution, whereas databases are searchable and enable visitors to 
access their desired content in a more
focused and targeted way using specific search terms. Equally, some other 
presentation options have been iden-
tified. Briefly, these options have been labelled as online ‘exhibitions’ when 
they structure contents in coherent
groupings and as ‘virtual museum’ when they aim to present a digital version of 
the whole institution.

All of these variables are linked to one of the two main axes that lead the 
analysis, the learning theory one.
On the one hand, highlights and catalogues identify a trend of institutional 
intervention, whereas collections,
databases, and more complex presentations allow a greater degree of user 
freedom.

The presence of a searching tool and the level of search it supports also 
relates to the learning theory, because
the existence of any kind of search gives users a higher degree of freedom to 
access the contents they want.
Furthermore, the searching tools have been classified as simple, advanced, 
complex, or combined tools.

In relation to the theory of knowledge axis, the research analysed the way 
content is delivered to users,
examining whether the related features support more the acquisition or the 
construction of knowledge. Briefly,

1For a more in-depth description of the empirical framework, see Fuentetaja 
[32].


Fig. 2. Empirical model of the research.

the following terms and categories were identified when examining presentation 
features. ‘Images’ represent the
digital facsimile of the physical content. ‘Labels’ are the digital equivalent 
of the physical labels of the collections
presenting facts related to the identity of the cultural content. ‘Explanatory 
texts’ offer in greater depth details
about the object, such as technique, composition, and topic, whereas ‘author 
details’ present information about
the artist or the person or group who created the object. The 
‘contextualization’ category refers to the information
about the context (historical, social, artistic, etc.) in which the object was 
created or to more specific contextual
information about the topic that the object is dealing with. If the website 
allows zooming into the digital image of
the objects, this was labelled as ‘image zoom’. Moreover, if websites deliver 
additional information related to the
content or the author, this was tagged as ‘link to related works’. Another 
variation of this category is the ‘link to
related news’, which can contain information about ongoing or recent news 
related to the content. The simplest
type of presentation of the contents is the merely informative and descriptive 
one that addresses the realist
vision of the acquisition of knowledge. The more complex and comprehensive 
types, however, allow users to
adapt the presented content to their mental structures and consequently are 
linked to the personal construction
of knowledge.

Finally, the provision of educational resources on the institutional websites 
was characterised as an identifiable
feature of support of construction of knowledge by the users due to the 
reinforcement of the learning processes
these foster. Among the websites investigated which provided some kind of 
educational resource, the features


ranged from the simple schedule and contact information to more sophisticated 
publications, downloadable
activities to be carried out in the gallery, virtual activities, or innovative 
edutainment options.

Additionally, due to the expansion of participatory approaches among cultural 
institutions, the presence of
social media was considered as another variable linked to user freedom and the 
construction of knowledge,
because they offer the possibility of participation by the users in the 
museum’s communication processes.2

2.3 Selection of the Sample

The initial research defined the sample of museum websites to analyse using the 
Virtual Library museums pages
(VLmp) in its 2008 version, an early leading directory of online museums around 
the world. The website was
initially created in 1994 by Jonathan Bowen (originally at the Oxford 
University Computing Laboratory) and
titled Virtual Library of Museums (VLM) and was later supported by the 
International Council of Museums
(ICOM) [46]. The directory was developed and organised in a distributed manner 
by country, with about 20
people and organisations in different countries maintaining various sections, 
such as the Canadian Heritage
Information Network (CHIN) maintaining the section on Canada or the Museum 
Documentation Association
(MDA) and later the Collections Trust maintaining the UK section. The directory 
is currently organised as a wiki
and is hosted at wikia.3 The entries that appeared on the early versions of 
VLmp were sent voluntarily by the
museum staff filling one simple web form, with slight variations according to 
the origin of the institution, and
they currently follow the standard conventions for wiki contributors.

Practical linguistic and time constraints limited the initial analysis to 
museums from Spain, the United King-
dom, Germany, Greece and the United States. Apart from the United States, in 
the rest of the countries studied,
the online museums analysed were all of the ones that appeared in the VLmp list 
in 2008. Regarding the Amer-
ican ones, however, because of the large number of museums listed, the project 
determined that the analysed
sample would include only art and history museums (according to the VLmp 
categorisation). The total amount
of museum websites analysed was 1,921, which was divided as follows: United 
States, 955; United Kingdom, 518;
Germany, 299; Spain, 138; and Greece 11.4

After an initial review during the first stage of the research, some of the 
cases were discarded from further
analysis for the following reasons: (a) the website did not work or was under 
construction or (b) the website did
not fulfil the minimum requirements for the analysis in relation to the 
presentation of collections information.
To fit with the focus of our research, only those websites presenting at least 
some highlights of the collection
with some minimum data about them were considered. For example, those websites, 
which only had a paragraph
describing the collection or only a few photographs, were not included in the 
analysis. After this first analysis,
the final sample studied in greater depth consisted of 219 entries. Most of the 
219 museums selected for the
analysis were art museums (78.5%) in English-speaking countries (United States, 
50.2%; United Kingdom, 25.6%).
The same final sample of 219 entries was consulted during late 2017 to identify 
potential transformations
of the websites and the related philosophy of communication of the museums. At 
this stage of the research,
the final sample was a little smaller than the previous one, because five 
institutions did not have a website
anymore and another eight museums did not provide access to their digital 
collections any longer, not fulfilling
the minimum criteria for the analysis. Therefore, the final sample to update 
the data consisted of 206 entries. The
average profile of the selected institutions remained similar, with most art 
museums (77.7%) in English-speaking

countries (United States, 51.5%; United Kingdom, 24.3%).

2The presence of social media was not considered during the first stage of the 
research in 2008, because they were not a common feature
among cultural institutions.

3http://museums.wikia.com/wiki/Virtual_Library_museums_pages.

4The latter included the web portal of the Hellenic Ministry of Culture 
(http://odysseus.culture.gr/), which links to more than 280 public
museums, as well as a number of private collections in Greece.


Table 1. Provision of Online Digital Collection and
Educational Resources on Museum Websites (%)

                 2008  2017

Digital collection only    21.9  11.7

Educational resources only  0.0  0.0

Both              78.1  88.3

Table 2. Provision and Type of Searching Tool
on Museum Websites (%)

2008    2017

None         43.8     33.5

Simple        16.4     22.3

Advanced       5.0      1.5

Complex       4.1      1.0

Combined      30.6     41.7

3 RESEARCH FINDINGS

This section presents both the results obtained during the first phase of the 
research in February 2008 and the
updated data from November 2017. Therefore, the comparison between the results 
obtained at these two phases
gives a good indication of the evolution of museums’ websites in the past 
decade.

The first item of analysis of the research has been, in both cases, the 
identification of digital collections and
resources on the analysed websites. Even though the two measurements show an 
overwhelming majority of
websites that combine both the digital collections of the institution and some 
educational resources, their per-
centage has grown by a little more than 10 points (Table 1). Therefore, 
although in 2008 the websites combining
these two types of digital resources represented nearly 8 of 10 entries, in the 
more recent analysis they are nearly
9 of 10 websites in the sample. The rest of the entries in both phases are 
websites that only present their digital
collections, without any kind of educational resource.

Regarding the existence of searching tools related to the collection, the 
presence of sites without any kind of
search has decreased by more than 10% (Table 2). However, there is still a 
third of the whole sample that does not
have any searching tool, not allowing users to search freely among the 
displayed contents. In contrast, the share
of sites providing a simple searching tool or one combining different degrees 
of search has increased 5.9% and
11.1%, respectively. In this sense, the existence of any searching tool 
represents two thirds of the sample studied
in the second phase.

Analysing the type and structure of the digital presentation of museum 
collections online, there has also been
a clear evolution. Although collections and highlights were present in about 
three fifths of the sample already
in 2008, the second measurement has identified that the presence of catalogues 
and databases has increased
from below half of the sample to about three fourths and two thirds of the 
sample, respectively (Table 3). This
increment is also accompanied by a significant growth in the presence of 
virtual exhibitions (22.3%), collections
(17.8%), and highlight (8.4%). Therefore, during the update of the data, the 
research has identified that catalogues,
databases, highlights, and collections appear in most of the analysed sample, 
together with digital exhibitions
which appear in nearly two of five websites.

However, when examining the way contents are presented, the different options 
have remained quite stable,
except for the decrease in use of author details (–17.6%), image zoom (–15.6%), 
and explaining texts (–6.2%)
(Table 4). The existence of links to related works, conversely, has experienced 
an increase of 5.4%, being present


Table 3. Type of Presentation of Digital
Collection on Museum Websites (%)

2008   2017

Catalogues      47.5    76.2

Databases      41.1    63.6

Highlights      63.0    71.4

Collection      59.4    77.2

Exhibitions      16.0    38.3

Virtual museum   8.2    9.2

Table 4. Means of Presentation of Digital
Content on Museum Websites (%)

              2008  2017

Image          95.0  98.5

Label          91.3  92.7

Explaining text     52.3  46.1

Author details     39.9  22.3

Contextualization   10.1  4.9

Image zoom      32.1  16.5

Link to related works  10.1  15.5

Link to news      2.3   1.5

Other          4.1   1.0 

Table 5. Type of Educational Resources
Identified on Museum Websites (%)

               2008  2017

Schedule and contact  95.9  98.9

Publications       32.2  48.4

In situ activities     26.3  27.5

Virtual activities     12.3  14.8

Edutainment activities  8.8  1.6

Other           1.2   0.0 

in one of six websites of the second sample. Therefore, apart from links to 
related works, it appears that the more
developed ways of presenting and exploring museum collections content were less 
present during the second
measurement.

Finally, when dealing with educational resources, which as mentioned earlier 
increased to 88.3% in 2017,
the schedule and contact information remain the most popular option of 
education provision (Table 5). In fact,
nearly all of the museums with any kind of digital educational resource display 
this information on the website.
The highest increase in type of educational resources has been found in the 
publications, because they now
represent nearly half of the sample of online museums with educational 
resources, although they did not even


reach a third of it during the first phase of the research. Edutainment 
activities, however, are the feature that
has suffered a decrease of 7.2%. Consequently, traditional forms of educational 
resources such as publications
or in situ activities have globally gained more prominence, whereas more 
innovative ones such as edutainment
activities have receded in general terms.

As mentioned previously, during the second measurement, social media have also 
been taken into account. A
total of 87.9% of the overall sample included some form of social media. Among 
these, the most popular social
media applications were, as expected, Facebook (97.2%), Twitter (91.2%), 
Instagram (68.0%), YouTube (56.4%),
Pinterest (26.5%), and any kind of blog related to the museum (24.3%). The rest 
of the options were present in
less than one of five cases of this delimited sample.

Once all of these features had been measured and identified during the first 
stage of the research in 2008,
a cluster and factorial analysis was performed to see if there was any grouping 
among the analysed cases, as
well as to verify if the potential groups of websites corresponded to the 
archetypical models proposed by the
constructivist literature for the physical institutions [32]. According to the 
statistical processes, four groups
were clustered by the presence of educational resources, the existence of any 
searching tool, the extent and
structure of the digitally displayed collection, and some advanced options of 
presentation of the contents.
Analysing the features implemented by the websites in each group and responding 
to the empirical framework
that linked each feature to the theoretical debates on the philosophy of 
communication of museums, we deduced
that the obtained four clusters corresponded to the archetypical models 
outlined in the literature (Table 6).

For comparability of the data and continuity of the research, we examined the 
same clusters again in the later
analysis, which showed that there has been a shift in the philosophy of museum 
website communication in the
past decade (Table 7). During the first measurement in 2008, the model of the 
stimulating museum was adopted
by nearly half of the sample of the analysed websites (46.3%), whereas the 
constructivist one was portrayed by
less than a third (31.7%) and the didactic museum by one of six entries 
(14.7%). The discovery museum model,
however, had a limited presence in the analysed sample (7.3%). Therefore, in 
2008, three of five analysed websites
implemented a philosophy of communication based on the notion of a greater 
institutional intervention. It is
also interesting to note that more than three fourths also adopt a 
technological implementation linked to the
construction of knowledge.

The second measurement, conversely, shows a different trend of technological 
implementation. In fact, three
of five websites of the sample (62.6%) have adopted the constructivist museum 
model’s philosophy of commu-
nication. Additionally, stimulating museums represent a fourth of the sample 
(25.7%), whereas the rest of the
entries are distributed between didactic museums (7.8%) and discovery ones 
(3.9%). Consequently, user free-
dom is supported in two thirds of the updated sample. Moreover, websites with 
technological implementation
influenced by the perspective of construction of knowledge represent nine 
tenths of the sample.

As mentioned earlier, the theory suggests that participatory museums are 
opening their communication pro-
cesses to digital users. Even though social media are present in each cluster, 
constructivist museums make more
extensive use of them, with more than nine tenths employing some type (93.0%), 
followed by the stimulating
(83.0%), the discovery (75.0%), and the didactic one (68.8%). Therefore, the 
use of social media is popular among
museums of all clusters. Some types of social media, however, are more common 
than others in some of the
clusters. In fact, two constructivist museums host two thirds of all of the 
registered blogs (63.6%), where more
developed contents are blended with options for user interactions.

Looking at the data from a country perspective,5 some clear differences can 
also be highlighted from this

temporal comparison (Table 8). Although in Spain (40%), Germany (60%), and the 
United States (60.9%) the stim-
ulating museum was the model adopted by most museum websites with the general 
focus being on institutional

5Greece was not taken into consideration in this analysis, because it has only 
two cases in the final sample. As mentioned in Section 2.2, the
sample was restricted to these countries due to practical linguistic and time 
constraints in the initial 2008 analysis and for comparability of
result in the 2017 one.


Table 6. Summary of Cluster Definition of Museum Websites’ Analysis

Cluster 1        Cluster 2        Cluster 3       Cluster 4


Type of digital
resources

Digital collection  Digital collection

Educational resources

Digital collection  Digital collection

Educational
resources


Searching
tools

None       None

Simple

Advanced
Complex
Combined

Advanced
Complex
Combined


Presentation
of collection

Presentation
of contents

Highlights
Catalogues
Collection

Images
Labels

Highlights
Catalogues
Collection

Images
Labels

Explaining texts
Author details
Image zoom

Collection
Databases
Catalogues
Highlights

Images
Labels

Explaining texts
Author details
Contextualization
Link      related work

Collection
Databases
Catalogues
Highlights
Exhibitions
Images
Labels

Explaining texts
Author details
Contextualization
Link      related work


Educational
resources

No         Schedule and contact
Publications

In situ activities

No         Schedule and

contact
Publications

In situ activities
Virtual activities
Edutainment
activities


Identification
of cluster

Didactic museum  Stimulating museum    Discovery

museum

Constructivist
museum

Table 7. Museum Websites According to
Clusters of Museum Archetypes (%)

               2008  2017

Didactic museum     14.7  7.8

Stimulating museum   46.3  25.7

Discovery museum    7.3   3.9

Constructivist museum  31.7  62.6

intervention, nearly half of the sample from the United Kingdom (48.2%) was 
implementing a philosophy of
communication based on the constructivist museum model, with overall emphasis 
placed on user freedom.

Analysing the updated data from this geographical perspective, the previously 
mentioned differences become
increasingly blurred. In 2017, the most popular type of website was the 
constructivist one in all countries, with
more than half of the group circumscribed in this cluster (Spain, 51.7%; 
Germany, 57.9%; United States, 64.2%;
and the United Kingdom, 68.0%). In all of the countries, more than eight tenths 
of the sample supported the


Table 8. Archetype of Museum Website by Country (%)

Germany    Spain    United Kingdom  United States
2008  2017  2008  2017  2008   2017   2008  2017

Didactic museum     20.0   5.3   30.0  10.3  17.9    6.0    8.2   8.5

Stimulating museum   60.0  31.6  40.0  31.0  17.9    20.0    60.9   26.4

Discovery museum     5.0   5.3   0.0   6.9   16.1    6.0    4.5   0.9

Constructivist museum  15.0  57.9  30.0  51.7  48.2    68.0    26.4   64.2

construction of knowledge perspective, with special emphasis on user freedom. 
Consequently, this transforma-
tion has also produced a more homogenised philosophy of museum communication 
compared to the previous
situation.

Summarising, the comparison of data gathered in 2008 and 2017 has demonstrated 
that institutional web-
sites of museums have evolved during this period. Having the main gravitational 
point on the construction of
knowledge in both measurements, the perspective on the learning theory has 
inversely shifted from the insti-
tutional intervention towards user freedom. Consequently, the main group of 
museum websites has become the
constructivist ones, whereas during the first stage of the measurement the most 
popular was the stimulating
one.

4 DISCUSSION AND FURTHER IMPLICATIONS

Digital technologies are increasingly being adopted by cultural institutions in 
diverse ways to try to engage dif-
ferent audiences, as well as to improve accessibility of their holdings. The 
proliferation of these online collections
is addressed to meet the evolving and increasingly more sophisticated needs and 
expectations of potential digital
visitors. However, the philosophy of communication of digital contents differs 
among museums and, even when
not immediately obvious, has lasting influence on their technological 
implementation schemes.

The research was designed to identify different ways online museum collections 
have been designed and
have evolved over the past decade. An initial analysis of the grouping of the 
analysed websites confirms that in
the digital sphere, museums replicate the archetypical models that the 
constructivist literature proposes for the
physical cultural institutions.

A comparison of results of the two phases of measurement indicates a clear 
evolution on the way museums
present their online contents. During the second stage, the share of museums 
that, apart from their digital collec-
tion, also delivered some kind of educational resource increased by more than 
10 percentage points. Within these
contents, similarly, there has been a significant increase in online 
publications provided. As well, the presence
of some kind of searching tool is higher, even though a third of the sample has 
still not implemented any. Cata-
logues, databases, collections, and exhibitions are also more present in the 
analysed sample, but conversely, the
way contents are presented has become less developed than in the previous 
stage, with fewer author or context
details, among others. However, links to related works have increased, probably 
because, after the implementa-
tion of digital databases, the linking of different parts of the databases is a 
straightforward process that does not
require too much effort.

Comparing the spread of the different clusters in the analysed sample, the 
shift of the centre of gravity becomes
evident. Although other archetypical models experienced a decrease in different 
degrees, the constructivist mu-
seum model gained three tenths of new cases. We can therefore infer that there 
has been a clear move from other
models towards less institutional intervention so that users can freely 
construct their knowledge according to
their own needs and expectations.

Finally, both the examination of the literature and cultural heritage practice 
suggest the rise of a new theoret-
ical model of museum, namely the participatory one. To test the strength of 
this model in the digital sphere, the


research measured the presence of social media during the second phase of the 
measurement in late 2017. The
results affirm that the share of websites with social media is significantly 
high. Moreover, their presence in the
different clusters is also remarkable, but the stimulating museum model and the 
constructivist one are the ones
with an overwhelming presence of social media. In fact, in the case of the 
latter, 9 of 10 of museums examined
make use of them and two thirds support blogs in their websites.

The systematic examination of a large sample across several European countries 
and the United States in
this study confirmed the idea of a growing participatory museum in the digital 
sphere. This is an important
contribution which has implications for research, practice, and policy in this 
field, as all too often reports on
digital initiatives in cultural heritage rely on anecdotal evidence and 
personal impressions rather than systematic
research. The study showed that most museums clearly felt the need to move from 
highly curated websites which
controlled the way users encounter their collections and associated information 
towards more open systems
that allowed online visitors to build their own path around the material 
provided according to their needs, and
that they have started encouraging more active user participation and 
possibilities for co-creation. These are
important findings for the institutions not following this paradigm, as well as 
for future planning and policy in
the field as a whole, because they also indicate the expectations from museum 
audiences and what is becoming
gradually the norm for the cultural offer.

The findings also raise important questions about the reasons and motivations 
for these developments. Is the
increasing adoption of social media by museums motivated largely by the need to 
widen their audience base and
reach new constituencies, reflecting the significant changes taking place in 
society at large at the same time?
This would be a relatively safe interpretation of the data. Considering that 
the study included two phases of
analysis performed during two different socio-technological junctures, the 
increase of participatory models in
the online presence of museums seems to be the logical reflection of the 
evolvement of society as a whole during
this 10-year period. The drastic increase in the degree of penetration of 
smartphones, other mobile devices,
and social networks worldwide shows that users are more willing to connect with 
each other and be more
participatory in different aspects of their daily life. Extending George Henri 
Rivière’s metaphor of ecomuseums
as mirrors of society [47], these findings indicate that museums are not 
isolated from this more widely developing
transformation and have transformed their communication models to meet the 
requirements and expectations
of users in the growing participative interconnected reality. The results 
obtained from this research indicate that
museums and the evolution of their philosophy of communication are accurate 
witnesses and testimonies of the
socio-technological changes of society.

But have these developments also led to a change in how museums and cultural 
heritage in general are con-
structed and experienced? Is this change reflecting a genuine invitation by 
museums to a growing number of
users to participate in this construction, encouraging ‘openness not closure of 
interpretation and valuation, mak-
ing flux, uncertainty and doubt critical’ [48]? Who is driving the changes? Are 
these coming from the museums
themselves or by different users or a combination of these two? Can we really 
talk about communities of users,
the way the participatory paradigm is encouraging us to, and what are the 
characteristics of these communities?
The participatory model is certainly spreading among museums, and the study 
showed that there is a growing
number of examples on how this is manifested and supported on museum websites. 
The study recorded the up-
take, reflecting the potential of the constructivist approach and participatory 
practices, and the intentions of a
large number of institutions covering a long period of time, including a large 
sample across different countries.
But is this being realised in practice?

The mere existence of social media on museum websites does not necessarily mean 
that this new model of
museum is being implemented. It is not only the presence of social media on its 
own that enforces the im-
plementation of the model of the participatory museum, but the way these new 
digital tools are used. Conse-
quently, this idea needs to be further researched by analysing the type of 
interaction, the contents shared, and
the type of participation that the use of these tools supports. Having laid the 
important groundwork with this


extensive analysis, future research can further build on this foundation and 
examine in depth the exact nature
of participation and communication between museums and their audiences.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Professor Seamus Ross for comments on an early draft of the 
article and to Karolina
Badzmierowska for improving the quality of the figures.

REFERENCES

[1] André Desvallées and Francois Mairesse (Eds.). 2010. Key Concepts of 
Museology. International Council of Museums and Armand Colin,
Paris, France. Retrieved September 10, 2018 from 
https://icom.museum/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Museologie_Anglais_BD.pdf.

[2] Peter Vergo (Ed.). 1989. The New Museology. Reaktion Books, London, UK.

[3] Stephen E. Weil. 1990. Rethinking the Museum and Other Meditations. 
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, DC.

[4] Graham Black. 2012. Transforming Museums in the Twenty-First Century. 
Routledge, London, UK.

[5] Eilean Hooper-Greenhill. 1992. Museums and Their Visitors. Routledge, 
London, UK.

[6] George Macdonald and Stephen Alsford. 1991. The museum as information 
utility. Museum Management and Curatorship 10, 3 (1991),
305–311. DOI:10.1016/0964-7775(91)90064-X

[7] Lydia Ntamkarelou, Philemon Bantimaroudis, and Maria Economou. 2017. 
Testing the uses and gratifications approach to museum
visiting: Adopting a mediated perspective in the cultural domain. Visitor 
Studies 20, 1 (2017), 56–71. DOI:10.1080/10645578.2017.1297131

[8] Jenny Kidd. 2014. Museums in the New Media Scape: Transmedia, 
Participation, Ethics. Ashgate, Farnham, England.

[9] Fiona Cameron and Helena Robinson. 2007. Digital knowledgescapes: Cultural, 
theoretical, practical, and usage issues facing museum
collection databases in a digital epoch. In Theorizing Digital Cultural 
Heritage: A Critical Discourse, F. Cameron and S. Kenderdine (Eds.).
MIT Press, London, UK, 165–191.

[10] Malcolm Chapman. 2015. Managing collections or managing content?: The 
evolution of museum collections management systems. In

The International Handbooks of Museum Studies, C. McCarthy (Ed.), Vol. 2. 
Wiley, 267–292.

[11] Nina Simon. 2010. The Participatory Museum. Museum 2.0, Santa Cruz, CA

[12] Museums Etc (Ed.). 2012. Conversations With Visitors: Social Media in 
Museums. Museums, Etc., Edinburgh, Scotland.

[13] Ana Luisa Sánchez Laws. 2015. Museum Websites and Social Media: Issues of 
Participation, Sustainability, Trust and Diversity. Berghahn,
New York, NY.

[14] Kirsten Drotner and Kim Christian Schroeder (Eds.). 2013. Museum 
Communication and Social Media: The Connected Museum. Routledge,
London, UK.

[15] Johan Oomen and Lora Aroyo. 2011. Crowdsourcing in the cultural heritage 
domain: Opportunities and challenges. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Communities and Technologies (C&T’11). 
138–149.

[16] Mia Ridge (Ed.). 2016. Crowdsourcing Our Cultural Heritage. Routledge, 
Abingdon, England.

[17] Canadian Heritage Information Network (CHIN). 2004. 2004 Survey of 
Visitors to Museums’ Web Space and Physical Space. Retrieved
September 10, 2018 from 
https://www.canada.ca/en/heritage-information-network/services/web-interactive-m
obile-technologies/
survey-visitors-museums-web.html.

[18] Jonathan Bowen. 2000. The virtual museum. Museum International 52, 1 
(2000), 4–7.

[19] R. J. Wilson. 2011. Behind the scenes of the museum website. Museum 
Management and Curatorship 26, 4 (2011), 373–389. DOI:10.1080/
09647775.2011.603934

[20] V. Kravchyna and S. K Hastings. 2002. Informational Value of Museum Web 
Sites. First Monday. Retrieved September 10, 2018 from
http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/929.

[21] D. Cunliffe, E. Kritou, and D. Tudhope. 2001. Usability evaluation for 
museum web sites. Museum Management and Curatorship 19, 3
(2001), 229–252. DOI:10.1080/09647770100201903

[22] K. Futer. 1997. Tell me what you want, what you really, really want. A 
look at Internet user need. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Electronic Visualisation and the Arts (EVA’97).

[23] Paul F. Marty. 2008. Museum websites and museum visitors: Digital museum 
resources and their use. Museum Management and Cura-
torship 23, 1 (2008), 81–99. DOI:10.1080/09647770701865410

[24] M. Agosti, F. Crivellari, and G. M. Di Nunzio. 2012. Web log analysis: A 
review of a decade of studies about information acqui-
sition, inspection and interpretation of user interaction. Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery 24, 3 (2012), 663–696. DOI:10.1007/
s10618-011-0228-8

[25] N. Fuhr, G. Tsakonas, T. Aalberg, M. Agosti, P. Hansen, S. Kapidakis et 
al. 2007. Evaluation of digital libraries. International Journal on
Digital Libraries 8, 1 (2007), 21–38.

[26] J. Zhang and J. Kamps. 2010. A search log-based approach to evaluation. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6273. Springer, 248–260.

DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-15464-5_26


[27] Cesar Carreras (Ed.). 2005. Patrimonio Cultural y Tecnologías de la 
Información y la Comunicación. A la búsqueda de nuevas fronteras.
Tendencias 2, Ayuntamiento de Cartagena, Concejalía de Cultura y 3000 
Informática, Cartagena, Spain.

[28] Ion Gil Fuentetaja and Maria Economou. 2008a. Studying the type of online 
access provided to museum collections. In Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of the Documentation Committee of ICOM (CIDOC’08).

[29] Ion Gil Fuentetaja and Maria Economou. 2008b. Online access to digital 
collections—Design and use of museum databases. In Proceed-
ings of Digital Heritage—14th International Conference on Virtual Systems and 
Multimedia (VSMM’08). 118–120.

[30] Ion Gil Fuentetaja and Maria Economou. 2009. Analysis of users’ access to 
museums websites—Comparison of weblogs. In Proceedings
of the 15th International Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia 
(VSMM’09). 123–128. DOI:http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/
10.1109/VSMM.2009.24

[31] Elisa Giaccardi (Ed.). 2012. Heritage and Social Media: Understanding 
Heritage in a Participatory Culture. Routledge, London, UK.

[32] Ion Gil Fuentetaja. 2012. Knowledge-Based Society and Innovation in the 
New Cultural Spaces: An Approach From the Digitised Museums.
Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Deusto, Spain.

[33] We Are Social and Hootsuite. 2018. 2018 Digital Yearbook. Heading 
Internet, Social Media, and Mobile Use Data for Every Country in
the World. Retrieved September 7, 2018 from 
https://digitalreport.wearesocial.com.

[34] GSMA Intelligence. 2017. Number of Unique Mobile Subscribers Worldwide 
Hits Five Billion. Retrieved September 3, 2018 from https:

//www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/2017/06/number-of-unique-mobile-subscribers-
worldwide-hits-five-billion/624/.

[35] Internet World Stats. 2018. Internet Growth Statistics. Retrieved 
September 3, 2018 from https://www.internetworldstats.com/
emarketing.htm.

[36] George E. Hein. 1998. Learning in the Museum. Routledge, London, UK.

[37] G. Leinhardt and K. Crowley. 1998. Museum Learning as Conversational 
Elaboration: A Proposal to Capture, Code, and Analyze Talk in
Museums. Museum Learning Collaborative.

[38] S. Allen. 2002. Looking for learning in visitor talk: A methodological 
exploration. Learning Conversations in Museums 1 (2002), 259–303.

[39] J. R. Hill, D. Wiley, L. M. Nelson, and S. Han. 2004. Exploring research 
on Internet-based learning: From infrastructure to interactions.
In Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology (2nd ed.), 
D. H. Jonassen (Ed.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ, 433–460.

[40] Jennifer Trant & participants in the Steve.Museum Project. 2006. Exploring 
the potential for social tagging and folksonomy in art
museums: Proof of concept. New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 12, 1 
(2006), 83–105.

[41] M. Sharples, P. Rudman, J. Meek, and P. Lonsdale. 2009. Myartspace: Design 
and evaluation of support for learning with multimedia
phones between classrooms and museums. Computers and Education 53, 2 (2009), 
286–299.

[42] M. Hagedorn-Saupe, L. Kampschulte, and A. Norchka-Roos. 2014. Informal, 
participatory learning with interactive exhibit settings and
online services. In Museum Communication and Social Media: The Connected 
Museum, K. Drotner and K. C. Schroeder (Eds.). Routledge,
London, UK, 111–129.

[43] Lynda Kelly. 2010. The Twenty-First Century Museum: The Museum Without 
Walls, Alma S. Wittlin Memorial Lecture, ICOM Shanghai,
China. November 2010.

[44] Lynda Kelly. 2014. The connected museum in the world of Social Media. In 
Museum Communication and Social Media: The Connected
Museum, K. Drotner and K. C. Schroeder (Eds.). Routledge, London, UK, 54–71.

[45] Maria Economou. 2015. Heritage in the digital age. In A Companion to 
Heritage Studies, W. Logan, M. N. Craith, and U. Kockel (Eds.),

Vol. 15. Wiley Blackwell, Chichester, UK, 215–228. 
DOI:10.1002/9781118486634.ch15

[46] Jonathan P. Bowen. 2002. Weaving the museum web: The Virtual Library 
museums pages. Program 36, 4 (2002), 236–252. DOI:10.1108/
00330330210447208

[47] George Henri Rivière. 1989. La Museologie Selon Georges Henri Rivière. 
Dunod, Paris, France.

[48] Graham Fairclough. 2012. Others. A Prologue. In Heritage and Social Media: 
Understanding Heritage in a Participatory Culture, E.
Giaccardi (Ed.). Routledge, London, UK, xiv–xvii.

Received February 2018; revised June 2018; accepted September 2018

