9

Museum Mobile Guide Preferences of Different Visitor Personas

MONEERAH ALMESHARI, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University

JOHN DOWELL and JULIANNE NYHAN, University College London

Personalising museum mobile guides is widely acknowledged as being important 
for enhancing the visitor experience. Due
to the lack of information about an individual visitor and the relatively 
limited time of his or her visit, adapting the user
interface based on a museum visitor’s type is a promising approach to 
personalisation. This approach first requires a mecha-
nism to identify the visitor type (‘persona’) and, second, knowledge of the 
preferences and needs of different types to apply
personalisation. In this article, we report a face-to-face questionnaire study 
carried out with 105 visitors to Scitech, a sci-
ence   and technology visitor centre. The study aims to investigate the main 
facts required to identify a visitor persona and
to explore the preferences of different visitor personas for particular mobile 
guide features. We limited our concern to the
user interface features of the guide (e.g., whether it provides recommendations 
for related items to view) rather than what
content and services the guide provides (e.g., what related items are 
recommended). We found that we can reliably identify
the visitor persona using two multiple choice questions about visit motivation 
and perceived success criteria. In addition,
we found that visitors have significant preferences for particular features 
such as presentation media, venue navigation tool,
object suggestions, details level, accessing external links, exhibit 
information retrieval method and social interaction features
such as voice communication, instant messaging, group games and challenges. 
Some features were found to be preferred dif-
ferently by different personas such as the challenges feature, some were found 
to be preferred by personas differently to the
overall preference such as in presentation media, and some were found to be 
preferred by some personas with no particular
preference for others such as a venue navigation tool. Instant messaging was 
found to be significantly not preferred by all
personas. The results provide a basis for personalisation of museum guides and 
services using a personas approach, which is
a solution where data about individual users may be limited and where the 
individual configuration of a user interface may
not be practical or warranted.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI); 
HCI design and evaluation
methods; User models;

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Personalisation, persona, museum mobile guide

ACM Reference format:

Moneerah Almeshari, John Dowell, and Julianne Nyhan. 2020. Museum Mobile Guide 
Preferences of Different Visitor Per-
sonas. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 14, 1, Article 9 (December 2020), 13 pages.

https://doi.org/10.1145/3423186

Authors’ addresses: M. Almeshari (corresponding author), Computer Science 
Department, Community College, Imam Abdulrahman Bin
Faisal University; email: mmalmeshari@iau.edu.sa; J. Dowell, Computer Science, 
University College London; email: j.dowell@ucl.ac.uk;

J. Nyhan, Information Studies, University College London; email: 
j.nyhan@ucl.ac.uk.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.

© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
1556-4673/2020/12-ART9 $15.00

https://doi.org/10.1145/3423186


1 INTRODUCTION

The use of technologies such as mobile guides (MGs) in museums presents large 
opportunities to enrich visitors’
experiences. However, such technologies can disorient visitors if not correctly 
designed for their needs [Ghiani
et    al. 2009]. This is an acknowledged challenge in museums because of the 
huge amount of information that
museums offer and the wide differences that exist among visitors, such as in 
their interests, knowledge, age,
personality, motivation and different ways of learning and acquiring new 
knowledge [Stock et al. 2007]. To
improve the visitor experience, museums and cultural heritage venues wish to 
offer personalised MGs [Roes
et  al. 2009]. MGs are portable devices that assist users in navigating and/or 
exploring a place, such as a museum,
city or shopping centre [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. They can be handheld 
devices such as tablets, PDAs and
smart phones, or wearables such as smart glasses and smart watches 
[Emmanouilidis et al. 2013].

Personalisation can significantly increase an MG’s usability, enhance visitors’ 
engagement with exhibits and
improve their experience [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. MGs can adapt based on 
different factors like time, location
and crowding, yet user preferences and characteristics are considered to be the 
most significant in providing ef-
ficient MG adaptation of content and services [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. We 
describe a system as personalised
when it adapts based on a user model that may contain the user’s 
characteristics, knowledge and preferences
[Ardissono et al. 2012]. Personalised systems anticipate users’ needs and 
interests and alter the interface accord-
ingly, usually with little or no effort required from the user.

Whether personalisation significantly improves on ‘one-size-fits-all’ design in 
relation to usability, user per-
formance and satisfaction has been the subject of a long-standing discussion 
[Shneiderman 1997, 2002]. Rich
[1983] stated that although a system can be designed to be good for a majority 
of users, it will likely not be the
best for any of them in particular. Features that make the use of a system easy 
for one type of person can make
it more difficult for another [Cooper et al. 2014; Rich 1989]. People are 
diverse, their requirements may often
conflict and no system can accommodate all differences using a one-for-all 
interface [Rich 1983]. However, Fla-
herty and Moran [2019] state that although personalisation minimises ‘noise’ by 
offering only information that
is expected to interest the user, it limits the user experience. Individuals 
change over time, and putting them in a
niche increases the probability of boredom and a loss of opportunities 
[Flaherty and Moran 2019; Kabassi 2013].
Personalisation success lies in studying users’ requirements, determining how a 
system can recognise a user
with specific requirements and when to apply the adaptation; otherwise, the 
user experience might be worse
than using a one-for-all interface. There is now a wide agreement that the 
benefits of personalisation greatly
outweigh its disadvantages, and it is today commonly applied in different 
applications.

Systems can be personalised by building user models for individuals or by using 
pre-set classes where each
class represents a type of user [Rich 1983]. These classes are used to infer 
facts about individual users who
are recognised to be a member of a specific group based on an established 
classification such as age, skill and
knowledge level [Korsgaard et al. 2020; Rich 1983, 1989]. Using this 
‘stereotypes’ approach, the interface adapts
in   the same way for users belonging to the same category. The approach 
assumes that the characteristics a
group has in common significantly outweigh those it does not [Kabassi 2013]. 
This contrasts with the indi-
vidual personalisation of an interface which assumes the availability of 
considerable individual information to
inform personalisation [Kabassi 2013] which may not be the case, particularly 
in pick-up-and-use systems such
as museum MGs. Using the stereotypes approach, the system can use a little 
information to infer other details
about the user. Thus, we can say that individual personalisation is best if 
adequate information about the user
is available, whereas personalisation using the stereotypes approach is 
sufficient and suitable where individual
personalisation is hard to achieve.

The most important factor in using the stereotypes approach is in first 
recognising the dominant classification
characteristic that most affects users’ needs and preferences, then in 
identifying the main facts needed to cate-
gorise users and identify the preferences of different groups. Thus, the system 
collects minimal information to
identify the user category and infer the user’s preferences. As mentioned 
before, this approach is very suitable
in settings like museums where visitors are mostly first-time users of the 
venue’s guide and use it for a relatively


short time. In this research, we refer to such a group as a persona and 
visitors are categorised by their visit mo-
tivation and goals. We have shown previously that we could reliably identify 
the visitor persona according to an
established taxonomy by Falk [2016] determining two features of individuals 
using multiple choice questions.
Falk [2016] studied museum visitors and categorised them based on their 
motivation into six personas: Explorers,
Socializer Facilitators, Parental Facilitators, Experience Seekers, Rechargers 
and Professional/Hobbyists.

Although traditional MGs provide only audio commentaries on exhibits [Fevgas et 
al. 2011], new-generation
MGs exploit the capability of smartphone and tablet platforms to provide highly 
interactive multimedia infor-
mation services for the visitor including, for example, self-navigated tours 
with map-based location finding and
directions [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013; Wacker et al. 2016]. Commentaries on 
objects by experts may be provided
in multiple media forms in addition to audio [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. 
Commentaries are cued manually by the
visitor, such as by using object or location identifiers, and potentially could 
be cued directly by location-specific
sensing [Lanir et al. 2011].

MGs can provide a range of features to enhance the visitor experience. Based on 
museum visitors’ needs, Hsi
[2002] listed a number of MG features, such as offering information about 
exhibits in the form of text, audio and
video; enabling the user to document objects for future reference, such as by 
bookmarking; allowing users to
reflect, write notes, read and communicate with other people; and 
recommendations and guidance about activ-
ities. Venue navigation support, object recommender and object identification 
tools are found in museum MGs
like the British Museum multimedia MG (The British Museum n.d.) and the 
National Gallery MG in the United
Kingdom (The National Gallery n.d.). Games and challenges are implemented in a 
number of museum mobile
applications, such as Treasure Hunters and InfoAge+ from the Science Museum in 
London (Science Museum
n.d.) and Museum of Solomos and Eminent Zakynthians in Greece [Yiannoutsou et 
al. 2009].

In this article, we report the results of a questionnaire-based study carried 
out at a major science and tech-
nology visitor centre (Scitech, located in the gulf states). The study 
investigates MG personalisation using the
stereotype approach, and specifically the method for categorising museum 
visitors according to their persona,
and  the preferences of different personas for the kinds of features widely 
found in MGs in museums. A wide range
of features have been investigated, including information presentation media, 
indoor navigation, accessing ex-
ternal web resources, exhibit recommendations, social interactions and cueing 
the display of supplementary
exhibit information.

2 RELATED WORK

An example of an ordinary MG is the use of a PDA or a smartphone to get indoor 
and/or outdoor navigation
support [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. However, MGs today are supported with 
varied advanced functionalities
such as location-aware navigation services, contextual information delivered 
using different media, access to
additional services such as email, bookmarking and communication channels 
[Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. Games
and challenges related to museum content are features offered in some MGs to 
increase visitors’ enjoyment and
motivate them to learn more [Ghiani et al. 2009].

Some museum MG functionalities found in the literature include enabling the 
user to plan the visit in advance
and to give post-visit summaries using tracking functionalities such as the 
Cultural Heritage Information
Personalization project [Roes et al. 2009]. The increased availability of 
internet connectivity opened the door
for enhancing MGs and provided visitors with extra resources to enrich their 
experience and knowledge
[Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. MGs offer users an enhanced visitor experience 
through interaction with their
environment and by creating opportunities to learn more about objects 
[Emmanouilidis et al. 2013].

Since MGs make extensive services available to users, adaptation is needed to 
reduce distraction and enhance
complementarity with experiencing exhibits and settings [Emmanouilidis et al. 
2013]. Researchers are investi-
gating how to make these guides aware of the user’s physical and social context 
[Emmanouilidis et al. 2013].
Developing efficient, context-aware MGs may have massive improvements on the 
practicality of MGs and their


use in different applications [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. MGs should be 
personalisable through the tailoring
of interface elements, services, content and recommendations to individual 
users based on their context and/or
user profile [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. Personalisation assists in providing 
or presenting the right service or
information in the most suitable way, in the right place, at the right time to 
the right person [Emmanouilidis
et   al. 2013]. A number of projects worked on personalising museum MGs, 
including HyperAudio [Bardram et al.
2004], Hippie [Oppermann and Specht 2000], Cultural Heritage Information 
Personalization [Roes et al. 2009],
PEACH [Kuflik et al. 2011], LISTEN [Zimmermann and Lorenz 2008] and UbiCicero 
[Ghiani et al. 2009].

The cold start problem is one of the challenges for personalisation in settings 
like museums where systems
usually do not have prior information about the user [Frias-Martinez et al. 
2006]. This issue can be solved by
using initial information to assign the user to a group and infer the user’s 
preferences accordingly. To follow
this approach, users need to be categorised based on certain parameters and 
mutual preferences between each
category members need to be identified. Several MGs assigned visitors to a 
particular category or stereotype to
provide personalised services based on their interest, knowledge, age group 
and/or physical abilities, such as
UbiCicero [Ghiani et al. 2009], Avanti [Fink et al. 1998; Stephanidis et al. 
1998], Intrigue [Ardissono et al. 2003]
and ARCHIE [Luyten et al. 2006]. These models were used to personalise a range 
of MG features such as content,
recommendations, presentation media and interaction approach.

Numerous techniques are applied in interactive product design, including user 
roles, user profiles and personas
[Cooper et al. 2014]. These three techniques rely on describing different 
users’ requirements in relation to a
product [Cooper et al. 2014]. However, they differ in the way they are designed 
and applied. User role classifies
users based on their mutual problems, needs and expectations, neglecting goals 
and motivation. A focus on user
roles such as nurse or salesman can oversimplify important differences between 
users—for example, a car buyer
role in designing a car company website is useless as different users perform 
the task differently [Cooper et al.
2014]. User profile constitutes a ‘brief biographical sketch’ consisting of 
demographic information, name, picture
and information about users that is mostly irrelevant to the product design, 
such as where they live and how
many children they may have [Cooper et al. 2014]. However, personas focus on 
goals and motivations. Although
personas sometimes provide similar information like name and family members, 
these are of minor significance
because they are used just to make personas come to life in the mind of the 
design team [Cooper et al. 2014].

In this research project, we focus on modeling users and personalising MGs 
based on the visitor’s persona.
Persona is defined as “an aggregate of target users who share common 
behavioural characteristics” [Miaskiewicz
and Kozar 2011, p. 418]. Personas are claimed to be one of the most significant 
tools used in designing systems
and interfaces [Cooper et al. 2014]. A persona represents a group of users who 
have common motivations and
goals [Cooper et al. 2014]. It concentrates on what the groups want to 
accomplish and how they think and behave,
and primarily it recognises how their different motivations and goals affect 
their interaction behaviour [Cooper
et al. 2014]. As mentioned before, personas can be presented as fictional 
characters with details such as name,
age and even photos [Cooper et al. 2014]. Nevertheless, Cooper et al. [2014] 
convincingly claim that motivations
and goals are the most fundamental characteristics to define a persona rather 
than demographics.

Identifying personas starts by conducting qualitative research where users are 
interviewed and their behaviour
is observed [Cooper et al. 2014]. This can lead to the identification of a 
number of personas with different re-
quirements [Cooper et al. 2014]. To start using these personas in UI design, 
the team needs to specify the target
audience to focus on [Cooper et al. 2014]. This avoids conflicts of 
requirements issues. Attempting to satisfy the
needs of three or four personas can be problematic [Cooper et al. 2014]. The 
design team should prioritise and
choose one persona to be the primary target [Cooper et al. 2014]. The primary 
persona is the persona where its
requirements can be satisfied without compromising the requirements of other 
personas [Cooper et al. 2014].
This process is called designating persona types [Cooper et al. 2014]. A 
primary persona will not be happy about a
UI designed for other personas, but other personas will not be dissatisfied 
about the UI designed for the primary
persona [Cooper et al. 2014]. Each UI can have one primary persona only, yet it 
is possible to design multiple UIs
for different personas if more than one primary persona exists [Cooper et al. 
2014]. There might be two reasons


for not being able to identify the primary persona [Cooper et al. 2014]. First, 
the system scope may be very broad
if it tries to offer many functionalities [Cooper et al. 2014]. Second, 
multiple UIs might be needed for a different
primary persona [Cooper et al. 2014] which can be accomplished by 
personalisation.

The importance of personalising MGs based on visitors’ motivations and goals is 
emphasised, but these were
mostly abandoned in previous research [Emmanouilidis et al. 2013]. Vavoula et 
al. [2019] found that museum
visitors with a social orientation differed from those with a learning 
orientation in their perceptions of the MG
and confirmed the need to consider the various users’ motivations in designing 
MGs. In this work, we focus on
the most important factors that determine a persona: motivations and goals. 
Personas will be labelled using Falk’s
taxonomy, which has been constructed based on identity-related visit 
motivations [Falk 2016]. Their motivation
for the museum visit forms visitors’ expectations and affects their experience 
[Falk 2016]. Falk [2016] states that
multiple factors impact the museum visit experience, such as the visitors’ 
behaviour in exploring the museum,
their existing experiences, knowledge and memories in addition to their 
motivation of the visit. To investigate
the relationships between these aspects, Falk [2016] conducted a study of 200 
visitors at the California Science
Centre, looking to answer three questions: why do people come to a science 
centre, what do they do inside the
centre, and how they made meaning of that experience? They received diverse 
responses regarding the purpose
of the visit, of which the most popular were “It’s a great place for kids,” 
“I’ve heard it’s really fun,” and “I’m
interested in science and thought I’d drop by to see what’s here” [Falk 2016]. 
Less frequent answers were “I’m
a science teacher and I’m always looking for neat new ideas” and “I find places 
like this really cool, it helps me
get my head straight.”

Falk [2016] clustered people visiting science centres into five main personas 
based on their reasons for vis-
iting: first, for their interest in technology and science; second, for an 
educational environment where families
and friends can enjoy and learn things; third, for an important attraction in 
the city; fourth, to fulfil intellec-
tual needs in the area of science and technology; and fifth, to escape from the 
everyday routine and recharge
intellectual and spiritual powers. Falk mentioned that museum visitors play one 
or more of the following roles
inside the museum, based on their motivations: Explorer, Facilitator, 
Experience Seeker, Professional/Hobbyist
and Recharger. Explorers visit to satisfy their curiosity and their general 
interest in the museum; most museum
visitors are Explorers [Falk 2016]. Facilitators visit to support other people 
they care about such as children or
companions, and the experience of their loved ones affects a Facilitators’ 
experience directly. Facilitators can be
Parental if their companions are children or Socializers if their companions 
are adults. Experience Seekers aim
to ‘live the experience’ rather than to learn, such as visiting a must-see city 
attraction [Falk 2016]. Professional/
Hobbyists visit a museum because of its content, they come for a desire to know 
more about a specific subject,
and they plan before going and have clear objectives of the visit [Falk 2016]. 
Rechargers visit a museum seeking
a contemplative, spiritual and restorative experience that will enable them to 
relax and recharge their powers
[Falk 2016].

These primary motivations are found to be the most common among visitors of 
most museum types, although
more motivations may exist [Falk 2013]. Smith [2013] states that further 
motivations and experiences can be
found with museums that focus on history, politics and cultural 
representations, such as “reinforcing or con-
firming the identities of gender, class, race, or nation,” and these might be 
less found in zoos and science-based
museums [Smith 2013, p. 478]. Similarly, Falk [2013, p. 114] states that 
“nationality, religion, gender or political
affiliation did not seem to be the primary motivations behind most people’s 
visits to art museums, children’s
museums, zoos or science centres.” In this study, we focused on the primary 
motivations that can be found with
most museum types, which does not assume that motivations to visit museums are 
limited to these six. Our
approach is flexible and capable of extension to additional personas based on 
the museum context as Falk also
confirmed. The reason for creating this taxonomy is to better understand 
different personas and by meeting their
differing needs, ultimately to improve their visit experience [Falk 2013].

Previous work confirmed the importance of personalising MGs and the stereotypes 
approach has been recog-
nised as particularly suited to the museum setting. In addition, personas are 
found to be one of the most important


factors affecting user requirements. The study we report investigated forms of 
evidence needed to reliably model
museum visitors as belonging to particular persona types based on Falk’s 
classification. In addition, it investi-
gated differences between visitor persona and preferences for particular MG 
features and services. The features
investigated are the media used to present exhibit information; the form of 
venue navigation support; commen-
tary cueing; access to related web sources for additional information; 
recommendations for other exhibits to
view; and social interaction services, directly and indirectly. The study was 
conducted as a questionnaire-based
survey of visitors to the Scitech science and technology centre.

3 METHOD

Visitors to Scitech were surveyed using a questionnaire deployed face-to-face 
over 4 weeks in 2018. The ques-
tionnaire, in the Arabic and English languages, had previously been reviewed by 
four museum curators in the
United Kingdom and gulf states. Two Arab specialists in the English language 
evaluated the questionnaire for
translation correctness. A pilot study was conducted with five visitors before 
gathering the main data. Consent
was obtained from all participants prior to data collection.

Individual visitors were asked to complete the questionnaire at the end of 
their visit. The questionnaire is
divided into three sections. The first asks respondents about their 
demographics, including gender and age group.
The second section probes respondents about their visit and includes a set of 
multiple choice questions based on
the five factors that characterise visitor personas in Falk’s description. The 
five factors are visit motivation, visit
success criteria, social aspects, knowledge of museum content and number of 
visits. Respondents were also asked
to identify themselves with reference to one of five short descriptions of the 
personas to be used in determining
the accuracy of the questionnaire in identifying the visitor persona.

The third section of the questionnaire collected information about preferences 
for UI features for a prospective
MG at Scitech (which currently does not provide any form of digital visitor 
guide). Features were identified based
on a review of MGs in use at major museums around the world. The questionnaire 
uses multi-choice questions
to ask respondents about their preferences for the following UI features:

i. Information media, which is the media used to present commentaries about 
exhibits including speech,
visual text and video. Commentaries are supposed to provide additional 
information about the labels
included in the real-world exhibit rather than repeating what is already there.

ii. Detailed text presentation, which is the method used for presenting 
detailed information, including a sum-
mary or bullet points with details on demand and detailed information.

iii. Venue navigation support, which is the form of navigation support within 
the venue, including interactive
map, audio directions and step-by-step directions using text with pictures.

iv. Commentary cueing, which is the way in which information about an exhibit 
is cued when the user ap-
proaches the exhibit, such as by manually selecting from a list, scanning the 
object using the camera or
automatic display upon approaching the exhibit.

v. Links to web resources to know more about an object.

vi. Recommendations for other exhibits to view.

vii. Social interaction through the MG with the group members (companions, 
accompanying family, etc.) and
with other visitors. Preferences for social interactions were voice 
communication, texting, group games
and challenges.

In the study, 105 visitors participated, of whom 66 were female, 65 were 
adults, 34 were teenagers, 3 were
seniors and 3 were children. It was the first visit to Scitech for 45 
participants, 39 participants had visited two to
four times previously and 21 had visited five times or more.

SPSS was used to analyse the data, which, being entirely categorical, required 
chi square tests.


Fig. 1. The relation of the visitor persona with the visit motivation and the 
perceived success criteria [Almeshari et al. 2019].

4 RESULTS

4.1 Persona Identification

Visitors’ answers for visit motivation, visit success criteria, social aspects, 
knowledge of museum content and
the frequency of visits with the self-assessed persona were examined using the 
chi square test and clustering
methods. The most distinguishing aspects of different personas found were visit 
motivation and perceived suc-
cess criteria. The combination of responses to the two questions resulted in 
six clusters representing different
persona groups that also correspond with visitors’ self-assessed persona 
(Figure 1). This result indicates that
we can reliably identify visitor persona using two multiple choice questions 
about visit motivation and success
criteria [Almeshari et al. 2019].

4.2 MG Feature Preferences

Statistically significant preferences for visitors overall have been found for 
presentation media, a venue navi-
gation tool, external links, recommendations for other exhibits, level of 
detail and exhibit information retrieval
method (Table 1). For presentation media used in the MG, participants 
significantly preferred watching videos
(37%) and reading text with pictures (33%) over simply listening to audio (12%) 
or just reading an exhibits’ labels
and panels without using an MG (17%).

An interactive map was the most preferred venue navigation tool (31% of 
participants), followed by step-by-
step directions using text with pictures (23%) and using all tools together 
(23%); some (14%) indicated that they
do not like to follow directions, and the least preferred option was audio 
directions (9%).

Of the visitors, 76% did not wish to access external web sources for additional 
information about exhibits.
In addition, 77% of visitors did not want to receive recommendations about 
other exhibits that might interest
them. For detailed text presentation, reading a summary of exhibit information 
with more details on demand was
significantly preferred by participants (62%) over bullet points with more 
details on demand (22%) and detailed
information (16%). Furthermore, automatic cueing using location identification 
services was the most preferred
method for retrieving exhibit information (50%), followed by choosing from a 
list (22%), scanning an object with


Table 1. Chi Square Results for Presentation Media, Venue Navigation Tool, 
External Links, Recommendations, Details
Level and Object Information Retrieval Method

a camera with (14%) and choosing from an interactive map (9%). The least 
preferred method was entering the
object number (5%).

The results also revealed that particular personas had significant preferences 
for particular features (Table 1).
For presentation media, a statistically significant number of Experience 
Seekers (53%) had a preference for read-
ing text with pictures about exhibits, whereas no significant preference was 
found for other personas. In contrast
to the overall preferred media (watching videos), watching videos was found to 
be the second preferred media
for Experience Seekers (18%) followed by listening to an audio (6%).

Regarding navigation tool preferences, the only persona with a statistically 
significant preference was Social-
izer Facilitators, of whom 48% preferred using an interactive map to navigate 
the venue over other options. Their
least preferred option was audio directions (5%), which is consistent with the 
overall preference. Significant pref-
erences were also found for the exhibit information retrieval method among 
Explorers, Parental Facilitators, and
Experience Seekers and marginally significant for Socializer Facilitators 
(Table 1). Like the overall preference,
the largest proportion of users would prefer the exhibit information to be cued 
automatically when they stand in
front of the exhibit, with percentages ranging from 43% for Socializer 
Facilitators to 59% for Experience Seekers.
The least preferred method was ‘entering object number’ for all except 
Experience Seekers, who least preferred
both entering an object number and choosing from an interactive map (6%).

For the details level feature, Rechargers, Explorers and Parental Facilitators 
significantly preferred having a
summary with more information on demand with 82%, 71%, and 59% of visitors, 
respectively. Their least preferred
option was having detailed information with 9%, 10% and 14% of visitors, 
respectively; no significant preference
was evident for other personas. In addition, not accessing external links was 
significantly preferred by Explorers
(79%), Socializer Facilitators (59%), Rechargers (80%) and 
Professional/Hobbyists (80%), whereas no preference
was found for other personas. Moreover, all personas except Rechargers and 
Professional/Hobbyists (who did not
have a specific preference), preferred not receiving recommendations for other 
exhibits to visit, with percentages
ranging from 77% for Experience Seekers to 84% for Socializer Facilitators.


Table 2. Chi Square Results for Social Interaction Features

4.2.1  Social Interactions. Two of the questionnaire elements aimed to identify 
visitors’ preferences for fea-
tures that support social interaction with members of their group inside 
Scitech. Visitors were asked whether
they would like to interact with their group members using the MG and, if so, 
whether they prefer voice com-
munication, text chat using instant messaging, group games and/or challenges.

Overall, a significant preference to communicate with other visitors was found 
(Table 2). A large majority (89%)
of participants indicated that they would like to interact with their group 
members using the guide. They did
not significantly prefer direct contact, which is represented here by voice 
communication and instant messaging
features (79% and 82%, respectively). No significant general preference was 
found for group games and challenges.
Social interaction preferences for different personas were analysed and 
statistically significant results are
found in Table 2. All personas except Rechargers preferred to communicate with 
other visitors, with percent-
ages ranging from 77% for Professional/Hobbyists to 86% for Facilitators. A 
strong preference was found for not
having direct communication with group members using instant messaging, with 
percentages ranging from 74%
of Parental Facilitators to 100% of Rechargers. In addition, all personas 
significantly did not want a voice commu-
nication feature, with the exception of Socializer Facilitators, where no 
significant difference was found. Percent-
ages ranged from 74% of Parental Facilitators to 100% for Rechargers and 
Professional/Hobbyists. Interestingly,
a significantly different preference for challenges was found among three 
personas. Challenges were strongly
preferred by Rechargers (100%) and Professional/Hobbyists (80%) but not by 
Socializer Facilitators (83%). How-
ever, a significant preference for not having group games was found for 
Professional/Hobbyists (82%), whereas

no significant preference was found for other personas.

5 DISCUSSION

The cold start problem in the context of personalising interaction with museums 
is an acknowledged challenge
because of the lack of prior information about the visitor and the short period 
of his or her visit. One of the


known solutions is to use limited information about the visitor to infer other 
facts about the visitor using the
stereotypes approach. In this study, we found that we can reliably categorise 
museum visitors based on their
persona using the two features of visit motivation and perceived success 
criteria, elicited by multiple choice
questions. In addition, the results indicated that different personas have 
particular preferences for most of the
MG features investigated, which is evidence of the need for personalisation. 
Differences of feature preferences
varied as follows: first, significant preference for some personas and no 
preference for others (venue navigation
tool, details level, exhibit information retrieval method, external links, 
recommendations, voice communica-
tion and group games); second, significant preferences that varied with the 
overall preference, specifically with
presentation media preferences; third, significantly different preferences for 
different personas which occurred
in the challenges feature; and fourth, significant preference common to all 
personas for an instant messaging
feature.

Experience Seekers preferred reading text with pictures to be informed about an 
exhibit which is different from
the overall preference (watching videos). Interestingly, more Experience 
Seekers preferred to just read exhibits’
panels (not using the MG) than those who preferred to learn about exhibits by 
watching videos or listening to
an audio. This might be because Experience Seekers normally visit museums to 
live the experience more than to
learn, so text with pictures allows them to skim and scan the content for the 
information they are interested to
know about which is hard to be done in videos. For external links preference, 
four personas (Explorers, Socializer
Facilitators, Rechargers and Professional/Hobbyists) strongly preferred not to 
access external links despite the
fact  that a number of respondents commented on their wish to have more details 
about objects, whereas no
difference was found for others. This implies that at least for these 
respondents, more information should be
presented by the MG rather than being made available via links to external 
resources.

Significant preferences were found for most UI features investigated among all 
participants regardless of their
persona; this assists in designing the baseline MG. Notably, audio on its own 
was the least popular media overall
for presentation of commentaries and navigation assistance, which indicates the 
popularity for interactive MGs
over old-generation audio guides. Overall, most respondents preferred watching 
a video, which is consistent
with previous findings on museum visitors’ preferences. Hsi [2002] found that 
people did not only like the
demonstrations but also the human touch of the video when museum specialists 
deliver information in a video
form. Nonverbal skills presented in video clips including facial expressions 
and body gestures were found to
greatly increase comprehension and recall compared to audio [Batty 2015; 
Sueyoshi & Hardison 2005]. In the
learning context, Mayer [2003] found that learners who received the information 
using verbal methods only
had difficulties in remembering key ideas. In contrast, multimedia learning 
where pictures and/or illustrations
are used beside words (spoken or text) were found to promote learners’ 
cognitive processing and deep learning
[Mayer 2003].

For the feature of detailed text presentation, most respondents would prefer a 
summary with more detailed
information available on demand. Recommendations for other exhibits to view 
were not preferred by the majority
(66%) of respondents. This is a useful result given the common assumption that 
recommendations would be
welcome by MG users. Regarding venue navigation, most respondents would prefer 
an interactive map as a
navigation tool, and this indicates its suitability as a default option in the 
baseline version.

Significant preferences of different personas in relation to social interaction 
also indicate a personalisation
focus. The majority of participants preferred to communicate with their group 
members using the MG. How-
ever, we found that most respondents would not wish to have direct interaction 
using voice communication or
instant messaging. However, personas were divided in their preference for 
challenges. Challenges are associ-
ated with active learning as explained by Sfard [1998], who identified two 
general metaphors of learning: the
acquisition metaphor views learning as gaining knowledge, whereas the 
participation metaphor views learning
as communicating, participating and reflecting. Sfard [1988] argues for 
combining these two metaphors, and it
follows that museum visitors should acquire knowledge and participate in 
activities to gain the best learning
experience. Additionally, it points to the social constructivist theory of 
learning where individuals learn from


interacting with others [Sivan 1986]. Challenges are found to be preferred by 
personas that are likely to value
information seeking (Professional/Hobbyists) and pleasure (Rechargers) rather 
than those who value the visit as
primarily a social event (Socializer Facilitators), as their role typically 
involves direct communication with their
companions which the interactive feature might compete with.

These findings about the differential preferences of personas for features of 
museum MGs support the ap-
plication of the stereotypes approach. Further comment on that approach must 
also be made, specifically to
acknowledge that stereotyping can result in the imposition, and perpetuation, 
of bias, discrimination and dis-
advantage. The field of social cognition has argued that stereotyping arises 
from the ‘perceptual differentiation’
between groups of individuals, and the subsequent association of perceived 
characteristics and attitudes with
that group, so that “any process that contributes to the differentiation 
between groups constitutes a potential
basis for the formation of stereotypes” [Hamilton and Sherman 2014, p. 4]. The 
categories used in this research
(e.g., Explorer and Facilitator) do not have deeply articulated stereotypes 
associated with them, yet it is never-
theless important to reflect on the ontological status of the concept of the 
stereotype in this research. As stated,
the technological justification for this approach is the cold start issue, 
which occurs when there is a paucity of
information about the user of an MG in a cultural heritage setting, and so it 
is possible to place them in a general
category only. In placing users in a general category, the system collects 
information about their motivations
and goals; it does not collect personally identifiable information like 
demographics or protected characteristics
that may be implicated in wider mechanisms of algorithmic bias and inequality 
(e.g., see Noble [2018] and O’Neil
[2016]). This is an important point regarding the definition of ‘stereotype’ in 
this research, which does not seek
to associate external perceptions with a social group. The stereotyping in play 
in this research does not engage
in, or respond to, questions of perceived individual or group identity; rather, 
it seeks to identify the goals and
motivations of an individual’s visit to a museum. We distinguish explicitly 
between the person as a user of the
guide and as a visitor experiencing the museum/cultural heritage setting and 
acknowledge the humanities view
that the visitor interacting with the setting is always unique and individual, 
that users construct their own ex-
perience of what they are being presented with in the setting. However, our 
article is dealing with modelling the
motivations and goals of the user of the guide to manage the mechanics of the 
interaction with the guide. The
aim is to provide an at least provisional categorization of the user and 
provide a variant user interface for the
user that is better than the one-size-fits-all baseline interface.

In summary, this study provides an indication of personalisation priorities 
based on the visitor’s persona. This
work will continue with examining opinions to prototypes created from the 
results of this study.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We would like to thank Scitech, Saudi Arabia, for their collaboration and 
support during data collection.

REFERENCES

M. Almeshari, J. Dowell, and J. Nyhan. 2019. Using personas to model museum 
visitors. In Adjunct Publication of the 27th Conference on User
Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization. 401–405.

L. Ardissono, A. Goy, G. Petrone, M. Segnan, and P. Torasso. 2003. Intrigue: 
Personalized recommendation of tourist attractions for desktop
and hand held devices. Applied Artificial Intelligence 17, 8–9 (2003), 687–714.

L. Ardissono, T. Kuflik, and D. Petrelli. 2012. Personalization in cultural 
heritage: The road travelled and the one ahead. User Modeling and

User-Adapted Interaction 22, 1–2 (2012), 73–99.

J. Bardram, H. Christensen, and A. Olsen. 2004. Hypernavigation in the Physical 
Space: Adapting Presentations to the User and to the Situational
Context. Technical Report. Centre for Pervasive Computing.

A. O. Batty. 2015. A comparison of video-and audio-mediated listening tests 
with many-facet Rasch modeling and differential distractor
functioning. Language Testing 32, 1 (2015), 3–20.

A. Cooper, R. Reimann, D. Cronin, and C. Noessel. 2014. About Face: The 
Essentials of Interaction Design. John Wiley & Sons.

C. Emmanouilidis, R.-A. Koutsiamanis, and A. Tasidou. 2013. Mobile guides: 
Taxonomy of architectures, context awareness, technologies
and applications. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 36, 1 (2013), 
103–125.


J. H. Falk. 2013. Understanding museum visitors’ motivations and learning. In 
AAVV, Museums Social Learning and Knowledge Producing
Processes. Danish Agency for Culture, Copenhagen, 106–127.

J. H. Falk. 2016. Identity and the Museum Visitor Experience. Routledge.

A. Fevgas, P. Tsompanopoulou, and P. Bozanis. 2011. iMuse mobile tour: A 
personalized multimedia museum guide opens to groups. In

Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications 
(ISCC’11).

J. Fink, A. Kobsa, and A. Nill. 1998. Adaptable and adaptive information 
provision for all users, including disabled and elderly people. New
Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 4, 1 (1998), 163–188.

K. Flaherty and K. Moran. 2019. The Dangers of Overpersonalization. Retrieved 
October 29, 2020 from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/
overpersonalization/.

E. Frias-Martinez, G. Magoulas, S. Chen, and R. Macredie. 2006. Automated user 
modeling for personalized digital libraries. International
Journal of Information Management 26, 3 (2006), 234–248.

G. Ghiani, F. Paternò, C. Santoro, and L. D. Spano. 2009. UbiCicero: A 
location-aware, multi-device museum guide. Interacting with Computers

21, 4 (2009), 288–303.

D. L. Hamilton and J. W. Sherman. 2014. Stereotypes. In Handbook of Social 
Cognition. Psychology Press, 17–84.

S. Hsi. 2002. The electronic guidebook: A study of user experiences using 
mobile web content in a museum setting. In Proceedings of the 2002
IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education.

K. Kabassi. 2013. Personalisation systems for cultural tourism. In Multimedia 
Services in Intelligent Environments. Springer, 101–111.

D. Korsgaard, T. Bjørner, P. K. Sørensen, and P. Burelli. 2020. Creating user 
stereotypes for persona development from qualitative data through
semi-automatic subspace clustering. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 
30, 1 (2020), 81–125. DOI:10.1007/s11257-019-09252-5

T. Kuflik, O. Stock, M. Zancanaro, A. Gorfinkel, S. Jbara, S. Kats, and N. 
Kashtan. 2011. A visitor’s guide in an active museum: Presentations,
communications, and reflection. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 3, 3 
(2011), 11.

J. Lanir, T. Kuflik, A. J. Wecker, O. Stock, and M. Zancanaro. 2011. Examining 
proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum
guide. Interacting with Computers 23, 5 (2011), 513–524.

K. Luyten, H. Van Loon, D. Teunkens, K. Gabriëls, K. Coninx, and E. Manshoven. 
2006. ARCHIE: Disclosing a museum by a socially-aware
mobile guide. In Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Virtual 
Reality, Archaeology, and Cultural Heritage.

R. E. Mayer. 2003. The promise of multimedia learning: Using the same 
instructional design methods across different media. Learning and
Instruction 13, 2 (2003), 125–139.

T. Miaskiewicz and K. A. Kozar. 2011. Personas and user-centered design: How 
can personas benefit product design processes? Design Studies

32, 5 (2011), 417–430.

S. U. Noble. 2018. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce 
Racism. NYU Press.

C. O’Neil. 2016. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality 
and Threatens Democracy. Penguin Random House LLC,
New York, NY.

R. Oppermann and M. Specht. 2000. A context-sensitive nomadic exhibition guide. 
In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Handheld
and Ubiquitous Computing.

E. Rich. 1983. Users are individuals: Individualizing user models. 
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 18, 3 (1983), 199–214.

E. Rich. 1989. Stereotypes and user modeling. In User Models in Dialog Systems. 
Springer, 35–51.

I. Roes, N. Stash, Y. Wang, and L. Aroyo. 2009. A personalized walk through the 
museum: The CHIP interactive tour guide. In Proceedings of
CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.

Science Museum. n.d. Games and Apps. Retrieved October 29, 2020 from 
https://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/games-and-apps.

A. Sfard. 1998. On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just 
one. Educational Researcher 27, 2 (1998), 4–13.

B. Shneiderman. 1997. Direct manipulation for comprehensible, predictable and 
controllable user interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2nd Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces.

B. Shneiderman. 2002. Promoting universal usability with multi-layer interface 
design. ACM SIGCAPH Computers and the Physically Handi-
capped 73–74 (2002), 1–8.

E. Sivan. 1986. Motivation in social constructivist theory. Educational 
Psychologist 21, 3 (1986), 209–233.

L. Smith. 2013. Theorizing museum and heritage visiting. In The International 
Handbooks of Museum Studies. John Wiley & Sons, 459–484.

C. Stephanidis, A. Paramythis, M. Sfyrakis, A. Stergiou, N. Maou, A. Leventis, 
and C. Karagiannidis. 1998. Adaptable and adaptive user
interfaces for disabled users in the AVANTI project. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Intelligence in Services and Networks.

O. Stock, M. Zancanaro, P. Busetta, C. Callaway, A. Krüger, M. Kruppa, and C. 
Rocchi. 2007. Adaptive, intelligent presentation of information
for the museum visitor in PEACH. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 17, 
3 (2007), 257–304.

A. Sueyoshi and D. M. Hardison. 2005. The role of gestures and facial cues in 
second language listening comprehension. Language Learning

55, 4 (2005), 661–699.

The British Museum. n.d. Audio Guides. Retrieved October 29, 2020 from 
https://www.britishmuseum.org/visiting/planning_your_visit/
audio_guides.aspx.

The National Gallery. n.d. Smartify App. Retrieved October 29, 2020 from 
https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/visiting/apps.


G. Vavoula, M.-A. Tseliou, and Z. Tsiviltidou. 2019. Bluetooth Low Energy 
beacon-based positioning for multimedia guides in heritage
buildings: A case study. In Proceedings of the World Conference on Mobile and 
Contextual Learning.

P. Wacker, K. Kreutz, F. Heller, and J. Borchers. 2016. Maps and location: 
Acceptance of modern interaction techniques for audio guides. In

Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.

N. Yiannoutsou, I. Papadimitriou, V. Komis, and N. Avouris. 2009. Playing with 
museum exhibits: Designing educational games mediated by
mobile technology. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Interaction Design and Children.

A. Zimmermann and A. Lorenz. 2008. LISTEN: A user-adaptive audio-augmented 
museum guide. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction

18, 5 (2008), 389–416.

Received May 2020; revised August 2020; accepted September 2020

