DEVELOPMENT OF A VIRTUAL MUSEUM INCLUDING A 4D PRESENTATION
OF BUILDING HISTORY IN VIRTUAL REALITY

T. P. Kersten ᵃ*, F. Tschirschwitz ᵃ, S. Deggim ᵃ

a HafenCity University Hamburg, Photogrammetry & Laser Scanning Lab, 
Überseeallee 16, D-20457 Hamburg, Germany -
(Thomas.Kersten, Felix.Tschirschwitz, Simon.Deggim)@hcu-hamburg.de

Commission II

KEY WORDS: 3D, 4D, construction phases, HTC Vive, modelling, reconstruction, 
virtual museum, virtual reality

ABSTRACT:

In the last two decades the definition of the term “virtual museum” changed due 
to rapid technological developments. Using today’s
available 3D technologies a virtual museum is no longer just a presentation of 
collections on the Internet or a virtual tour of an exhibition
using panoramic photography. On one hand, a virtual museum should enhance a 
museum visitor’s experience by providing access to
additional materials for review and knowledge deepening either before or after 
the real visit. On the other hand, a virtual museum
should also be used as teaching material in the context of museum education. 
The laboratory for Photogrammetry & Laser Scanning
of the HafenCity University Hamburg has developed a virtual museum (VM) of the 
museum “Alt-Segeberger Bürgerhaus”, a historic
town house. The VM offers two options for visitors wishing to explore the 
museum without travelling to the city of Bad Segeberg,
Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. Option a, an interactive computer-based, tour for 
visitors to explore the exhibition and to collect
information                                                        of interest 
or option b, to immerse into virtual reality in 3D with the HTC Vive Virtual 
Reality System.


1. INTRODUCTION

A function of a museum is to aide non-specialists in
understanding information and context via an interaction of short
duration. Ideally museums should also deepen visitors’ interest
in the subjects that they present. In accordance with their
educational mission, museums must constantly present and re-
present complex issues in ways that are both informative and
entertaining, thus providing access to a wide target audience.
Visitors with prerequisite knowledge, prior experiences, as well
as associated individual interests and objective tend to take a
more active role in engaging with museums (Reussner, 2007).
Today,  these  fundamental  ideas  are  increasingly  being
implemented through so-called “serious games”, which embed
information in a virtual world and create an entertaining
experience through the flow of and interaction with the game
(Mortara et al. 2014).

For the museum field, the consolidation and implementation of
culture and information technology is often called Virtual
Museum (VM). The definition of a Virtual Museum is, however,
not fixed. Since the 1990s many different definitions for a VM
have been published with significant differences depending on
the contemporary status of information and communication
technology (ICT) (Shaw 1991; Schweibenz 1998; Jones &
Christal 2002; Petridis, et al. 2005; Ivarsson 2009; Styliani et al.
2009). According to V-MusT (2011) “a virtual museum is a

digital entity that draws on the characteristics of a museum, in
order to complement, enhance, or augment the museum
experience through personalization, interactivity and richness of
content. Virtual museums can perform as the digital footprint of
a physical museum, or can act independently …”. Pujol &
Lorente (2013) use the term VM to refer to a digital spatial
environment, located in the WWW or in the exhibition, which
reconstructs a real place and/or acts as a knowledge metaphor,
and in which visitors can communicate, explore and modify
spaces and digital or digitalized objects. Pescarin et al. (2013)
evaluated VMs. They found that the impact of interactive
applications on the user seems to be depend on the capability of
the technology to be “invisible” and to allow a range of
possibilities for accessing content. To achieve this, VMs need a
more integrated approach between cultural content, interfaces,
and social and behavioural studies. However, VMs are using
different media, such as text, images, sound and animated 3D
models, to act as an interactive platform for the informative
supplement of the real museum visit (Samida 2002). The design
of the VM varies from simple Web pages (Bauer 2001) to
panorama-based virtual tours (Kersten & Lindstaedt 2012) to
interactive apps for smartphones or tablets (Gütt 2010). A good
example for a VM is AfricanFossils.org, which presents as a
virtual lab a spectacular digital collection of fossils and artefacts
found mostly at Lake Turkana in East Africa in the Internet
(http://africanfossils.org/). The digital collection of animals,
human ancestors, and ancient stone tools offers a unique tool for

Figure 1. Front view of the Old-Segeberg town house (left), its textured 3D 
model (centre) and plan of the ground floor (right)

* Corresponding author


scholars and enthusiasts to explore and interact with the
collection online. Another example for a digital collection of
exhibits is Smithsonian X 3D (https://3d.si.edu/), for which
various 3D capture methods are applied to digitize iconic
collection objects. The idea of Smithsonian X 3D is to promote
the use of 3D data for many applications.

A VM that is retrievable on the Internet would offer the
possibility of making a time- and location-independent virtual
visit to the museum. It would also facilitate preparation for and
evaluation of an actual museum visit, as this medium stimulates
the attention of the visitor while also providing further
information. The great strength of a VM is the ability to utilise
current ICT to supplement conventional exhibition techniques
via the presentation and integration of content into the real
exhibition,  thus  significantly  contributing  to  a  visitor’s
understanding.

The Laboratory for Photogrammetry & Laser Scanning of the
HafenCity University Hamburg has developed a VM for the
museum  of  Old-Segeberg  town  house  (Alt-Segeberger
Bürgerhaus) as an interactive tour for a windows-based computer
system and as a virtual reality application in 3D using the Virtual
Reality System HTC Vive. Based on this concrete example, this
contribution provides examples of how museums can fulfil the
technological and media requirements in the 21st century using
detailed geo data and appropriate ICT.

2. THE OLD-SEGEBERG TOWN HOUSE

predecessor building (Reimers & Hinrichsen 2015). In the
following centuries the house was extended and converted
several times.

With support of a historian and based on historical sources
(Reimers & Hinrichsen 2015) six construction phases of the
building could be identified. These were each modelled in
AutoCAD and are presented in chronological order in Figures 2
and  3, from left to right.: (1) construction work (1541), (2) the
first extension (around 1587), (3) Stall addition at the south front
(before 1805), (4) extension of the living space (from 1814), (5)
renovation and conversion of the front façade (ca. 1890), and (6)
refurbishment of the building and conversion to a museum
(1963/64). A detailed description of the six construction phases
of                            the building are presented in Kersten et al. 
(2014).

After the refurbishment in 1963-64, the building contained the
local museum of the City Bad Segeberg. For the next few
decades, exhibits from the petty-bourgeois living and working
environment of the 19th and 20th centuries were shown in its
historic  rooms.  After  the  adult  education  centre
(Volskhochschule) Bad Segeberg took over sponsorship of the
museum in 2012, it was renamed “Museum Alt-Segeberger
Bürgerhaus" and successive permanent exhibitions on the topics
"500 years development of civic culture in the mirror of a 470-
year-old house" and "800 years history of the city of Segeberg -
from the medieval castle settlement to the modern resort" were
hosted.


Even at the end of the 19ᵗʰ century, the Old-Segeberg town house
(Fig. 1), located in the city of Bad Segeberg 40 km northeast of
Hamburg, was already known as the oldest house of the city.
Today it is one of only a few well-preserved, small urban town
houses from the beginning early modern period in the federate
state of Schleswig-Holstein. In the new installed council book
from 1539, the building was already included in the historic rent
listing. After Segeberg was almost completely destroyed in June
1534 during the Count feud from 1533-1536/37, the town house
was re-established in 1541. Firstly, as a simple hall building with
a single-storey, in-frame construction with brick-bracing to the
property that is today's Lübecker Straße No. 15. The method of
construction was poor and building materials from neighbouring
ruined properties (e.g. in the roof framing) were partly recycled.
However, the basic structure of the framework construction was
established from fresh wood (oak). It is presumed that the cellar
with walls, constructed from boulders, hailed from the medieval

3. PROJECT WORKFLOW

The entire museum Old-Segeberg town house was modelled in
3D so that visitors could virtually explore the exterior and interior
of the building in close relationship to the various exhibits in the
museum. Special focus was given to developing visitors’
understanding of the complex history of the building via an
interactive visualisation of the nearly 500-year-old museum
building's extensive construction history.

The project has been roughly divided into three major phases of
development (Fig. 4): A) Concept creation and test of all planned
functions, B) Modelling and texturing of the Museum, its content
and the models for the visualisation of architectural history, and

C) Integration into a program and generation of interaction
possibilities.

Figure 2. 3D model of Old-Segeberg town house: f.l.t.r. 1541 outside, 1541 
inside, 1584-1588 outside and 1584-1588 inside

Figure 3. 3D model of Old-Segeberg town house: f.l.t.r. 1814 outside, 1814/1890 
inside, 1890 outside and 1964 outside/inside


4. MODELLING

The 3D object recording was conducted over two separate
acquisition campaigns, on 21 April and 2 August 2011, using the
IMAGER 5006h terrestrial laser scanner and two digital SLR
cameras, Nikon D40 and D90, for the exterior and interior areas,
respectively. The base for the development of the virtual museum
was  this detailed 3D recording of the exterior and interior of the
building using digital photogrammetry and terrestrial laser
scanning. Intensive 3D CAD modelling, using coloured point
clouds  from  laser  scanning  and  manually-measured
photogrammetric 3D points, represented the second stage of
activity.   For the 3D modelling and visualisation of huge point
clouds in AutoCAD, the plug-in PointCloud, from the company
Kubit in Dresden, Germany, was used. Using this plug-in, CAD
elements, e.g. surfaces such as the half-timbered bars, could be
directly digitised in the point cloud. In the oriented images, each
object point was measured manually in at least four photos from
different camera stations. After the image point measurements
were completed for one object element, for example a window,
the computed 3D object points for this element were transferred
to AutoCAD. There, polylines were generated from these points,
and these were later used to generate surfaces. Simple object
parts were constructed using geometrical primitives (e.g. cuboid,
pyramid, cylinder, cone, circle, ring, etc.), while some more
complex object parts were created with the Boolean operators in
CAD (union, subtraction and intersection). Kersten et al. (2014)
give a detailed description of the data acquisition and modelling
of the town house.


Figure 4. Workflow for the development of the VMs – A):
concept (top - green), B): modelling (centre - blue) and C):
programming (bottom - red)

Existing VMs are typically either digitized collections or virtual
tours based on panoramas with little or no interaction. In this
work, to further exploit the potential of digital visualisation, the
serious games approach was selected because it enabled
consideration                         of the use of elements known from games, 
such as
extensive free movement and the option of looking closer at
surroundings or interesting objects/exhibits.

Initially, several methods of control and presentation of
information were tested in a rough test model. In later stages,
other planned functions were implemented to enable optimal use
of the program.

Based on this reconstructed 3D model further 3D modelling was
carried out to fulfil the requirements for the development of the
virtual museum. To bring the interior to life, the most important
exhibits, information panels and furnishings were also modelled
and these were placed in their appropriate places within the
building. Additionally the six different historical construction
stages of the Old-Segeberg town house were modelled, in
collaboration with the historian Nils Hinrichsen (Director of the
Museum Old-Segeberg town house). The appearance of the
building, in particular for the early construction phases, is only
assigned to parts based on historical scientific evidence collected
in recent years. For example, a dendrochronological analysis of
individual timbers was conducted, which determines the age of
various parts of the building and which could be assigned to the
corresponding construction phases (Reimers & Hinrichsen
2015). For data reduction, the six construction phases were
modelled together, i.e.  objects,  which occur  in  several
construction phases, were created only once and stored in a
database, thus allowing utilisation by the program in multiple
phases. Fig. 3 shows the first four construction stages and their
most distinctive changes from the same perspective. Finally,

Figure 5. Advanced 3D models of the different construction stages of the town 
house. From left to right: 1541-1585, 1585 – ca.

1805, ca. 1805-1814 and 1814 – ca. 1890


based on terrestrial photos and Google Earth data, the
environment of the building was also reconstructed to ensure that
this historic building was embedded in its urban environment. As
a stylistic device, the surrounding buildings were coloured grey
to emphasize the museum in the visualisation.

The texture mapping of the model was carried out using the
software Autodesk 3ds Max. The photos used for texturing were
mainly locally-taken photos. However, textures that were freely
available online were also integrated after appropriate editing.
Furthermore, bump and alpha textures were used to improve the
depth effect and the appearance of details. In total, 239 textures
were used for visualisation.


5. GAME ENGINE UNREAL

A game engine is a software framework designed for the creation
and development of video games for consoles, mobile devices
and personal computers. The core functionality typically
provided by a game engine includes a rendering engine for 2D or
3D graphics to display textured 3D models (spatial data), a
physics engine or collision detection (and collision response) for
the interaction of objects, an audio system to emit sound,
scripting, animation, artificial intelligence, networking,
streaming, memory management, threading, localisation support,
scene graph, and may include video support for cinematics. A
game engine controls the course of the game and is responsible
for the visual appearance of the game rules. For the development
of a virtual museum, game engines offer many necessary
concepts with much functionality so that users can interact with
the VM.

In the past, the development of game engines was mostly based
on the development of a specific game with paid licensing to
external game developers. In recent years, however, most of the
large engine providers have focused more on the advancement of
engines and additionally offer free access for developers.
Examples of game engines with free potential use are the engine
Unity from Unity Technologies, the CryEngine of the German
development studio Crytek, and the engine Unreal from Epic
Games (www.epicgames.com). A current overview and
comparison of different game engines can be found e.g. in
O’Flanagan (2014) and Lawson (2016). The selection of the
appropriate engine for a project is based on the provided
components mentioned above, the adaptability in the existing
work processes as well as special preferences of the (game)
developer. In the framework of this project, the game engine
Unreal was selected due to the opportunity to develop application
and interaction logics using a visual programming language, the
so-called Blueprints. Visual programming with Blueprints does
not require the writing of machine-compliant source code. Thus
it provides opportunities for non-computer scientists to program
all functions for a VM using graphic elements. The saving in time
associated with this method of software development allows for
the generation of additional scenarios and for more intensive user
testing. Game engines are, therefore, very well-suited to the
development of virtual museums.

6. VIRTUAL REALITY SYSTEM HTC VIVE

HTC Vive (www.vive.com) is a virtual reality headset (with a
weight of 555 grams, Fig. 6) for room-scale virtual reality. It was
developed by HTC and the Valve Corporation, was released on 5
April 2016, and is currently available on the market for EUR 899.
Basic components are the headset for the immersive experience,
two controllers for user interactions and two "Lighthouse" base
stations for tracking the user's movement.

Figure 6. The virtual reality system HTC Vive in use. The
screen in the background shows the same sequence as appears
to the user in the VR glasses (right)

The technical specifications of the HTC Vive are summarized in
the following: a) two screens with a field of view of
approximately 110 degrees, one per eye, each having a display
resolution of 1080x1200 with a refresh rate of 90 Hz, b) more
than 70 sensors including a MEMS (Microelectromechanical
systems) gyroscope, accelerometer and laser position sensors, c)

4.6 by 4.6 m tracking space for user operation using two
"Lighthouse" base stations for tracking the user's movement with
sub-millimetre precision by emitting pulsed IR lasers, d)
SteamVR running on Microsoft Windows as platform/operating
system, e) Controller input by SteamVR wireless motion tracked
controllers, and f) front-facing camera for looking around in the
real world to identify any moving or static object in a room as
part of a safety system.

The following technical specification is required as the minimum
for the computer to be used: processor Intel™ Core™ i5-4590 or
AMD FX™ 8350, graphic card NVIDIA GeForce™ GTX 1060
or AMD Radeon™ RX 480, 4 GB RAM, video output 1x HDMI
1.4-connection or DisplayPort 1.2 or newer, 1x USB 2.0-
connection or newer, operating system Windows™ 7 SP1,
Windows™ 8.1 or more up to date or Windows™ 10.

The device uses a gyroscope, accelerometer, and laser position
sensor to track the head's movements as precisely as one-tenth of
a degree. Wireless controllers in each hand, with precise
SteamVR-tracking, enable the user to freely explore virtual
objects, people and environments, and to interact with them. The
VIVE-controller is specifically designed for VR with intuitive
control and realistic haptic feedback. The Lighthouse system uses
simple photo sensors on any object that needs to be captured. To
avoid occlusion problems, this is combined with two lighthouse
stations that sweep structured light lasers within a space.

7. IMPLEMENTATIONS

7.1. Windows-based VM implementation

The major part of the work dealt with the programming of the
user                          movement in the museum, with information queries 
and the
corresponding animations in the game engine "Unreal Engine".
The intuitive handling of the program was an essential
prerequisite, allowing also easy access to and use of the VMs for
inexperienced PC users (Fig. 7).


now be selected to display information about the development of
building use. Furthermore, it is possible to start an animated
transition from the previous construction phase, which shows and
describes the structural changes to the next state for each
construction phase. These animations required a subdivision of
all 3D models into 387 smaller objects, to precisely control the
movement of the objects for each animation. In the animation,
the user is guided by predefined camera movements to
appropriate viewpoints.


Figure 7. Graphical User Interface for the virtual museum tour

The control of the software is exclusively available via mouse
interaction and is based on many well-distributed positions
throughout the building, which can be directly selected by
clicking on a map or approached using a defined camera path
through the 3D environment. In these positions, the users can
freely look around using a 360⁰ panorama. Users can also zoom
in and out, and click on the available information button. As a
special highlight of the VM, the visualisation of the building
history was realized with a "model in the model" (Fig. 8, Fig. 9
left and Fig. 11 right).

Figure 8. Graphical User Interface for the building history with
an animated view into the interior of a construction phase

At one station of the virtual tour, which is located in front of the
model, the user can open this model to display and animate, upon
request, each of the building states including all related
information. The user can look at the building model from all
sides using virtual rotation. In addition, with a mouse click, the
roof can be removed, the individual floors can be driven apart by
animation, and the appearance of the building interior in the
respective building phase will be shown (Fig. 5). Each room can

Menus and information boards, which can be opened during the
individual tour using the info button placed next to the selected
objects, were created for the exhibits. These menus include brief
explanations and mostly a figure that can be enlarged via mouse
click. Some information is directly imparted using detailed point-
of-view shots in the 3D environment. In such cases, cameras were
distributed in the whole Museum at appropriate points. These can
also be selected using the info button.

Finally, comfort functions were created such as tool tips, an
overview map and a help menu. For quality assurance, the VM
program has been tested by several people with different PC
experience to subsequently customize the software details.

7.2. Virtual Reality Application with HTC Vive

Based on the modelled and textured 3D data in the game engine,
an immersive virtual reality visit was developed utilizing the new
Virtual Reality System HTC Vive. The visit offers the possibility
of experiencing the museum and the history of the building from
a real person’s point of view and interaction scheme. For this
purpose, the controlling positions have been replaced by the
possibility of free movement by the user. To bridge long
distances in the virtual object, a teleportation function is available
for                         the navigation of the user (Fig. 10).

The users’ hands can interact with various components of the
virtual world to control the building’s presentation. The object
selection and menu operation is enabled via a "laser beam",
which is controlled by the motion controller (Fig. 11 left). The
highlight of the virtual museum visit is the animation of the
architectural building history, which is vividly represented by the
HTC Vive glasses directly in front of the visitor’s eyes on the
basis of the 3D models (Fig. 6). Different historically-confirmed
construction phases are visibly demonstrated in 3D and changes
are illustrated by transition animations.

Figure 9. Impressions from the 3D environment of the virtual museum 
Old-Segeberg town house including the model of the
building (left), the stairways to the attic (centre) and a view at the attic 
(right)


The VR application using the HTC Vive gives the opportunity to
check the geometric quality of the modelled 3D data during the
VR visualisation. However, walking through the virtual museum
of the Old-Segeberg town house, collecting all of the information
in the exhibition and seeing all of the different animations, which
explain the construction changes of the building over the
centuries, is a very immersive experience.


Figure 10. Navigation in the virtual museum Old-Segeberg
town                         house using the developed teleportation function 
for the
Virtual Reality System HTC Vive

Figure 11. The virtual museum Old-Segeberg town house in the
Virtual Reality System HTC Vive as an intense experience.
Menu navigation with green motion controller by "laser beam"
(left) and second red controller for the information menu (right)

8. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

This contribution described the successful development and
implementation of a Virtual Museum for the museum Old-
Segeberg town house with two options: a) interactive software
application for windows-based computer systems and b) virtual
reality application for the VR system HTC Vive. Many visitors
and participants have tried and tested the VM by using both a
windows-based computer system and the VR system HTC Vive.
The Old-Segeberg town house can look back on 475 years of
architectural development, identified and explained in form of
animations, which are the highlights of the virtual museum. The
developed computer program contains 13 guided viewpoints
distributed at important positions in the museum and 52 info
menus with detailed information for visiting the virtual museum.
The program has a size of 500 MByte and is executable as a
standalone program on Windows operating systems. It is
developed in the game engine Unreal, which offers, not only
complex visualisations of 3D objects, but also provides every
programming tool necessary for creating extensive interactions
between the user and the environment. To make this program
accessible for the visitors, a PC-terminal will be provided in the
Old-Segeberg town house in the next museum season. It allows,
in addition to the current exhibition, a multimedia interaction
with the history of the city and the building. Thus, based on this
building, it carries out an important educational contribution for
the urban development of Bad Segeberg and about 500 years of
housing tradition in Schleswig-Holstein. Developed entirely in
3D, the VM is unique in this form in Germany as an informative
component of a museum.

The emerging technology Augmented Reality also offers great
potential by combining the advantages of a VM with the real
museum visit. It also enables the museum visit in situ using a
Smartphone or tablet for digital superimposition of the current
state with a historic building state, for example at sites of (former)
historic ground (Canciani et al. 2016).

In general, VR applications or systems can also be used outside
the museum context - for example, for product visualisations, for
facility management, for trade fairs or for tutorials of workflows
(e.g. for the fire brigade).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The significant support of the historian Nils Hinrichsen (Head of
the  museum  Alt-Segeberger  Bürgerhaus)  is  gratefully
acknowledged.

REFERENCES

Bauer, T., 2001. Museen und Internet. Museologie Online, 3,
112-161.

Canciani, M., Conigliaro, E., Del Grasso, M., Papalini, P. &
Sacconea, M., 2016. 3D Survey and Augmented Reality for
Cultural Heritage. The Case Study of Aurelian Wall at Castra
Praetoria in Rome. ISPRS-International Archives of the
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information
Sciences, 41 (B5), 931-937.

Gütt, I., 2010. Smartphone-Applikationen im Museumsbereich.
Bachelor thesis, Studiengang Museumskunde, Fachbereich
Gestaltung,                       HTW Berlin, 74 p.

Ivarsson, E., 2009. Definition and Prospects of the Virtual
Museum.   Master   Thesis,   Uppsala   University,
http://www.elinivarsson.com/docs/virtual_museums.pdf.

Jones, G. & Christal, M., 2002. The future of virtual museums:
On-line, immersive 3-D environments. Created Realities Group,
2002 (9), 1-12.

Kersten, T. & Lindstaedt, M., 2012. Virtual Architectural 3D
Model of the Imperial Cathedral (Kaiserdom) of Königslutter,
Germany through Terrestrial Laser Scanning. EuroMed 2012 -
Int. Conference on Cultural Heritage, Ioannides, M.; Fritsch, D.;
Leissner, J.; Davies, R.; Remondino, F.; Caffo, R. (Eds.), Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), Volume 7616, Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 201-210.

Kersten, T., Hinrichsen, N., Lindstaedt, M., Weber, C., Schreyer,

K. & Tschirschwitz, F., 2014. Architectural Historical 4D
Documentation  of  the  Old-Segeberg  Town  House  by
Photogrammetry, Terrestrial Laser Scanning and Historical
Analysis. Progress in Cultural Heritage. Documentation,
Preservation, and Protection, 5th International Conference,
EuroMed 2014, Limassol, Cyprus, November 3-8, 2014,
Ioannides, M., Magnenat-Thalmann, N., Fink, E., Zarnic, R.,
Yen, A.-Y., Quak, E. (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS), Volume 8740, Springer International Publishing
Switzerland 2014, pp. 35–47.


Lawson,   E.,   2016.   Game   Engine   Analysis.
https://www.gamesparks.com/blog/game-engine-analysis/ (last
access January 12, 2017).

Mortara, M., Catalano, C. E., Bellotti, F., Fiucci, G., Houry-
Panchetti, M. & Petridis, P., 2014. Learning cultural heritage by
serious games. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 15(3), 318-325.

O’Flanagan, J., 2014. Game Engine Analysis and Comparison.
https://www.gamesparks.com/blog/game-engine-analysis-and-
comparison/ (last access January 11, 2017).

Pescarin, S., Pagano, A., Wallergård, M., Hupperetz, W. & Ray,
C., 2013. Evaluating virtual museums: Archeovirtual case study.
Archaeology in the Digital Era, Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Conference of Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods
in Archaeology (CAA), 74-82.

Petridis, P., White, M., Mourkousis, N., Liarokapis, F., Sifniotis,
M., Basu, A. & Gatzidis, C., 2005. Exploring and interacting with
virtual                       museums. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
Conference of
Computer  Applications  and  Quantitative  Methods  in
Archaeology (CAA), Figueiredo, A. & Gonçalo Leite, V. (eds)
2007.

Pujol, L. & Lorente, A., 2013. The Virtual Museum: a Quest for
the Standard Definition. Archaeology in the Digital Era,
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Conference of Computer
Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA),
40-48.

Reimers, H. & Hinrichsen, N., 2015. Das Alt-Segeberger
Bürgerhaus. Vom Stadtwohnhaus des 16. Jahrhunderts zum
Stadtmuseum im 21. Jahrhundert. Lutherstadt Wittenberg,
Torgau und der Hausbau im 16. Jahrhundert, Jahrbuch für
Hausforschung, Goer, M., Furrer, B., Klein, U., Stiewe, H. &
Weidlich, A. (Hrsg.), Band 62, 341-355.

Reussner, E., 2007: Wissensvermittlung im Museum – ein
überholtes Konzept? Kultur und Management im Dialog, 5, 20-
23.

Samida, S., 2002. Überlegungen zu Begriff und Funktion des

„virtuellen Museums“: Das archäologische Museum im Internet.

Museologie Online, 4, 1-58.

Schweibenz,  W.,  1998.  The"  Virtual  Museum":  New
Perspectives for Museums to Present Objects and Information
Using the Internet as a Knowledge Base and Communication
System.  Internationales  Symposium  für  Informations-
wissenschaft ISI, 185-200.

Shaw, J., 1991. The Virtual Museum. Installation at Ars
Electrónica. Linz, Austria: ZKM, Karlsruhe.

Styliani, S., Fotis, L., Kostas, K. & Petros, P., 2009. Virtual
museums, a survey and some issues for consideration. Journal of
Cultural Heritage, 10(4), 520-528.

V-MusT, 2011. What is a Virtual Museum? Virtual Museum
Transnational   Network,   http://www.v-must.net/virtual-
museums/what-virtual-museum, (last access January 13, 2017).

