The digital museum: Challenges and solution

Author

Li, YC, Liew, AWC, Su, WP

Published

2012

Conference Title

Proceedings - ICIDT 2012, 8th International Conference on Information Science 
and Digital
Content Technology

Copyright Statement

© 2012 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE 
must be
obtained                                                for all other uses, in 
any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this
material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective 
works, for resale or
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of 
this work in other
works.

Downloaded from

http://hdl.handle.net/10072/49660

Link to published version

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6269353

Griffith Research Online

https://research-repository.griffith.edu.au


THE DIGITAL MUSEUM: CHALLENGES AND
SOLUTION

Yu-Chang Li¹, Alan Wee-Chung Liew², and Wen-Poh Su³

School of Information and Communication Technology
Griffith University

Queensland, Australia

¹liyuchang@gmail.com
²a.liew@griffith.edu.au
³veronica.su2011@gmail.com


Abstract—This article discusses the development of digital
curation in cultural expression applications, such as museum and
art gallery, focusing on the user experience perspective. The use
of digital technology has improved the production process in
conventional museum and art gallery and has greatly facilitated
the interaction between viewers and collections. Although the
concept of digital museum has attracted a lot of attention in the
past decade, there remain many challenges to be addressed. In
this paper, we discuss current progress in the development of
digital museum and identify important factors that affect its
successful deployment.

Keywords: digital museum, digital curation, semantic web,
argumented reality, user experience

I.  INTRODUCTION

From time immemorial, the way traditional museum
exhibits are only limited to leading the audience into
showrooms to view the original artworks, however, due to the
limitations of factors such as exhibition space, venues, and
schedules, the total numbers of direct contacts with exhibits are
in  the minority. For instance, the National Palace Museum
(NPM) of Taiwan, which contains more than 650,000 domestic
and foreign antiquities, has continuously increased its
collections by purchasing or accepting donations of artifacts.
The entire collections will take over 30 years to exhibit if each
exposition is run for three months at a time [1]. A museum
would seem like an antiquity warehouse, which is
inapproachable and distant. Moreover, since the antiquities
belong  to all citizens, the traditional museum has a predicament
where owners cannot freely acquire information about their
properties.

According to the statutes of International Council of
Museum (ICOM), a museum “is a non-profit, permanent
institution in the service of society and its development, open
to  the  public,  which  acquires,  conserves,  research,
communicates and exhibits the tangible and intangible heritage
of humanity and its environment for the purposes of education,
study and enjoyment” [2]. Hence, an important role of a
museum is to make its heritages become a part of our life,
much like the functions of a library. Based on this aspiration,
the digital curation of a museum has become a common pursue
in both the academic and public sectors.

Technology and societal impact play a complementary role
to each other in museum digitization. The value and function of

cultural heritage are realized through knowledge sharing and
exchange of idea. Hence, the focus of the digital museum
should be on the visitor’s experience rather than the technology
itself. However, without the aids of advanced technology, such
goal cannot be materialized effectively. Therefore, the
challenges involved in the creation of digital museums can be
divided into two dimensions: the use of technologies and the
enhancing the user experiences.

In the past, the technical dimension has been the primary
focus. Issues ranging from the imaging and digitization of
artifacts to data management have been extensively researched
[3–6]. It is true that a successful digital museum requires a
good technology; it is also true that the success cannot come
without considering the cultural heritage sharing aspect. There
are, however, very few studies on the later, particularly on the
area of user experience.

In this article, we focus on the aspect of user experience and
describe strategies that help to enhance a visitor’s on-site
experience in a museum through digital technology. We
discuss how the use of technology can improve the production
process and increase the communication and interaction
between viewers and collections in museums and art galleries.

II.  THE CHALLENGES OF DIGITAL CURATION IN THE
MUSEUM

Virtual Museum versus Physical Museum

The museum digitization movement has been ongoing for
over a decade since the beginning of the 21st century. The term
“digital curation” first emerged in an academic seminar
convened by the Digital Preservation Coalition and the British
National Space Centre in London on 2001 to discuss the
improvement of the Open Archival Information System
Reference Model (OAIS) standard and the knowledge sharing
of digital curation in various fields [7]. However, the huge
advancement of information technology has turned the
digitization  process  to  become  more  progressive  and
diversified. Accordingly, the virtual museum has become a
platform where museum connect with their clients outside the
museum  building.  Many  well-known  museums  have
committed to create their virtual environment by either putting
the digitized information onto their web pages or pre-recording
their tour guide through portable devices, such as the
Collection Database (Compass) of The British Museum [8]; the
virtual museum of The Louvre on the iPhone [9]; and The


Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Timeline of Art History [10].
The common feature of these efforts is that the information can
be received by the visitors quicker and easier without time and
space limitation.

Although the development of museum seems to benefit
from the application of digital technology, digitization of the
museum has also brought with it some disadvantages. For
example, the physical museum is becoming more isolated and
functionless without visitors participation; meanwhile, the
audiences are also losing the opportunities for sharing and
communicating their viewpoint with others. From the user’s
point   of view, the digital museum is not to replace the
traditional museum; conversely, the digital information should
complement the physical museum. Carol has found from her
interview survey that the traditional value of museum has been
unintentionally eroded in the process of museum digitization
[11].   She argued that the physical museum has an irreplaceable
status in people's minds. Hence, the aim of museum digitization
should be focus on filling the gap of the physical museum.

According to Coulter-Smith, the constitutions of social
communication and art collections have been hampered by the
operating patterns of galleries for a long time [12]. Cultural
institutions should function as a learning environment [13]. As
museum experience should be done on physical place with
genuine objects, the enhancement of user experience in the
physical museum, such as how to improve the communication
by considering the interactive factors has attracted much effort.

The Development of Museum User Experience

User experience has been considered as an indispensable
factor by academic researchers and curators in museum
digitization in recent years. According to Beer, museum
visitors spend less than one minute on each collection in on-site
[14]. Thus, how to captivate visitors by extending the time of
art appreciation and enhancing their knowledge by adopting
various machineries has become a new branch of research in
digital curation. As Gurian pointed out, the physical museum
will be blended with technological element in the near future
[15]. Some research results have suggested that, the museum
experience can be boosted by an interactive and immersive
environment [16]. Consequently, it can be expected that the
traditional method of masterworks’ description will be replaced
by other methods that enhance the sensory impact and the real
experience of the visitors. Based on this concept, the discussion
of  user experience can be divided to several aspects, the facets
of visualization, personalization, interaction with education,
and repacking. These key elements may offer visitors with a
valuable experience and help improving communication
between viewers, curators, and museums.

III. CURRENT STRATEGIES

Analyze the challenge and limitation of digitization for
providing the best viewing experience is a crucial step in the
development of digital curation. In the implementation of
digital  museum,  the  relationship  between  people  and
collections is more important than the compilation itself.
Therefore, in relation to the aim of digitization of collections
and the problems being faced, this section will discuss the
current development of the user experience in the museum

setting and offer the possible strategies for the future
achievement.

Visualization (Casual information visualization)

The characteristic of visualization is the keystone of user
experience in the field of the digital museum. Previously,
visualization systems were mostly exploited in the professional
field as an overview provider through complex technology-
based interface and interaction [17]. For example, The Solid
Software Xplorer (SolidSX), which is a Windows tool of
creating the high-resolution image structures for users to
understand and examine the applications that are designed by
any type of .NET languages; and Crime mapping, which is a
map adopting by law enforcement agencies (LEA) for showing
and analyzing different crime models.

However, the situation has been changing over the last few
years. The concept of Casual Information Visualization (Casual
InfoVis) has been noticed by the digital curation community.
Casual InfoVis is designed for audiences who do not have
special qualifications or only visit museums casually [18]. The
view of this insight comes from the edification of other
information systems, social visualization and artists’ visual
works. The difference between Casual InfoVis system and
traditional InfoVis can be due to differences in user population,
usage pattern, data type as well as goals. The information can
be illustrated by using computer-mediated applications [17].

Casual InfoVis can be described as a rudiment of utopia in
the cultural organization. However, the implementation and
outcome of this concept still relied on the integrating of
different components such as interactive interface, database and
personalized framework. With the progress of digital museum
development, the developers and curators should keep this
notion in mine in order to assess the visitors’ behavior
effectively for providing the best solution.

Personalization

The function of personalization is one of the fundamental
components for the achievement of digital museums. Proper
use  of this concept could not only provide curators with better
opportunities to understand the needs of visitors, but also
cultivate their potential devotion. As Riecken pointed out,
personalized attention is a way of “building customer loyalty
by establishing a one-to-one relation” [19]. In addition,
personalization may also reduce the financial pressure in the
operation of museum management. Many studies have found
that the budget of a museum has become less rely on
government support. How to use the limited resources to
connect with audiences has become the major concern [20].
For instance, museums could optimize the tour paths to attract
visitors by using personalized technologies; or choose the most
popular collections for exhibition via repackaging.

In order to accomplish this objective, there are a number of
projects in museum personalization. CHIP (Cultural Heritage
Information  Presentation),  which  is  an  interdisciplinary
research project between information technology and museum
masterpieces created by CATCH (Continuous Access to
Cultural Heritage) program of NWO (The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research) in Netherlands [16]. It
creates a pre-visit experience for allowing visitors to build a


personal tour path by rating collections online, as well as
offering a chance to review the collections which are of interest
to them after they finished the on-site visit. The Piggy Bank
Project, a sub-work of Simile project directed by the MIT
Libraries and MIT CSAIL, is presented as a Firefox extension
for user to collect digital contents from separate websites, then
combine them together for further references [21]. In spite of
each project providing diverse features, the most noteworthy
feature of these projects is their integration of the Semantic
Web.

The personalization of item can be implemented by using
highly semantic module. According to Tim Berners Lee, the
Semantic Web is an extension of the web based on the fact that
machines can better comprehend the metadata by giving a well-
defined meaning to information. In the context of digital
museum, the Semantic Web is evolving from being museum
dominance towards user centered collaborative filtering. The
materialization of which could be involved in several modules,
including Resource Description Framework (RDF), a data
model that is used to carry a variety of metadata between
resources [22]; Web Ontology Language (OWL), a language
that  is clearly expressed in terms of proper nouns and the
relationship between these terms [23]; Friend of a friend
(FOAF), a way of self-discretion adopted by XML and RDF
that could make the connection between each individual in the
Web [24]; Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS), a
language that is designed by RDF Schema for sharing and
demonstrating controlled vocabularies [25], as well as Cidoc
CRM, which is announced by Comité International Pour La
Documentation (CIDOC) that particularly focus on the
museum  of cultural heritage [26].

Although the Semantic Web seems to be a beacon for the
museum personalization, it still has some potential drawbacks
need to be overcome, such as the issues of privacy, data
security and immature ontologies. It is due to the fact that the
role of Semantic Web in the museum context is to provide a
way of analyzing and understanding human behavior while
separating irrelevant personal details of the users. The
questions of how to maintain information as a personal
resource without privacy and security concerns, and how to
define the ontology have become important issues for the
future.

Interaction and Education

Formerly, museum exhibitions tend to comprise of actual
objects with limit explanations, which are always written by
curators or reviewers on the panels beside the objects or pre-
record in the audio hand-held device as a personal tutor during
the visit. However, such styles of presentation has many
negative aspects, such as creating distance between visitors and
the objects, not educational, as well as make people feeling
more isolated as they do not have the opportunity to
communicate with each other about the objects that they are
interested in. Spasojevic and Kindberg pointed out that the
expectation of museum exhibitions should be blended with
extendable visiting experience, and appropriate interaction with
real objects [27]. Coulter-Smith also reinforced the importance
of interactive activities, which can lead arts into our lives by
building a bridge between visitors and artworks [12]. Therefore,

the capacity of the museum should be like a "multi-dimensional
educational institution," where a visitor can retrieve the
information for references, and approach the additional
resources of the artworks like in a tutorial. In relation to these
aims, some techniques have been proposed to enrich the
constituent of an interactive museum, such as the Web-based
construction, Virtual Reality (VR) or Augmented Reality (AR).

Augmented reality (AR) is an extension of VR system that
could intermingle actual with virtual environment for real-time
interaction [28]. The implementation of AR may work towards
filling the gap of traditional museums which do not offer
enough interactive stage for visitors and artifacts. Some studies
have been aimed at the application of AR to museum
interaction. For instance, the project of Flypad developed by
The  Mixed  Reality  Lab  (MXR)  in  the  University  of
Nottingham for a controversial arts center called The Public in
England. This project endeavored to enhance the condition of
interactivity by using the technique of AR, which allows users
to control their avatar by operating different control panels, and
to further improve the user experience [29]. Another example is
the undertaking of the virtual showcase, which is a translucent
display system using AR. It was first introduced at Vienna
University of Technology in Austria, followed by the advance
pattern, which was announced at Laval Virtual 2011 by the
ESIEA engineering school in France [30]. The ambition of this
system is to lay emphasis on the interaction between visitors
and physical artifacts and break the barrier between virtual and
actual museums by integrating the AR technology into a
traditional museum showcase format.

In summary, the technique of AR might be a strategy to
reach the goals of interaction and education in the physical
museum. Unfortunately, on the embodiment of personalization,
the pre-experience and after-experience of the visit are not
contemplated in these systems. Thus, in order to strengthen the
entire journey of the museum visitors, the association of the
personalized feature should be taken into account in the
development of the interactivity process in the future.

Repackaging

According to the statistic of Museums and Art Galleries
Market Report from HighBeam Business in American, most of
the cultural funding is decreasing across the United States in
the twenty-first century. During this period of economic
depression, the Smithsonian, the world's largest museum and
research complex in USA, has reported that 29 percent of
visitors vanished in just seven months [31]. In this period of
budget tightening, the capabilities of information interchange
and data repackaging are important consideration for museum
digitization. The ability of data repackaging should be
considered at the early design phase in the digitization process.
Re-combinative collection may bring additional revenues to a
museum   in various ways. For example, flexible resources could
increase the opportunity of art commoditization to bring
additional revenue for cultural organizations, as well as to
achieve the goal of marketing to attract visitor. As the social
anthropologist Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood mentioned,
the significance of goods is the ability to become
representatives of social status, symbol or glory [32]. With the
change   of economic situation, more and more artwork will be


converted into goods in the future. The interchangeable data
can reduce the production costs by reusing existing
components.

The solutions of repackaging involve a number of
techniques,  which  have  been  suggested  over  different
discussions. One important consideration is migration, which
allows data to move freely between different platforms for
cross-platform sharing. Next, the ability of transformation is
another important feature. The digital information should
facilitate easy format change for it to be recombined and reused
with other items. An example is FBX, which is a file format
used by the majority of 3D software such as MAYA and 3DS
MAX for transferring their projects to other applications.

Repackaging has raised the issue of quality control. Giaretta
suggested that the result of multiple file conversion should be
paid more attention before the information is transformed [33].
Thus, how to make sure that the converted information is
identical to the original and whether the health status of the file
is available for long-term preservation will be a critical topic of
deliberation in the future.

IV. CONCLUSION

Successfully addressing the challenges in digital museum
development could not only promote its growth in this high-
tech era but also boost the societal value of cultural heritage.
This article provides some insight to the development of digital
museum  from  the  user  experience  viewpoint.  A  clear
understanding of the different factors affecting user experience
can provide guidelines to assist curators and scholars in
structuring a viable framework. Although much effort has been
devoted to the digital museum development, there is still much
work to be done. For example, a personalized system will need
to confront the issues of privacy and the usage efficiency in the
physical museum; then interactive mechanism might disregard
the influence of personalization; and a flexible data format will
need to deal with the issue of quality control in different
platforms. Hence, how to address these issues will be a crucial
task in this emerging area.

REFERENCES

[1]  K. Chou, National Palace Museum 2010 Annual Report. Taipei:
National Palace Museum, 2010.

[2]  International Council of Museum, “ICOM Statutes,” 2007. [Online].
Available: http://icom.museum/who-we-are/the-organisation/icom-
statutes.html#2.

[3]  C. Wei, “STREAMING OF HIGH-RESOLUTION PROGRESSIVE
MESHES OVER THE INTERNET,” ACM, 2010.

[4]  M. Carrozzino, C. Evangelista, A. Scucces, F. Tecchia, G. Tennirelli,
and M. Bergamasco, “The virtual museum of sculpture,” Proceedings
of the 3rd international conference on Digital Interactive Media in
Entertainment and Arts - DIMEA ’08, p. 100, 2008.

[5]  M. Kellogg Smith, “Viewer tagging in art museums: comparisons to
concepts and vocabularies of art museum visitors,” Advances in
classification research, vol. 17, pp. 1-19, 2006.

[6]  F. Cameron, “Digital Futures I: Museum Collections, Digital
Technologies, and the Cultural Construction of Knowledge,” Curator:
The Museum Journal, pp. 325-340, 2010.

[7]  P. Constantopoulos and C. Dallas, “Aspects of a digital curation agenda
for cultural heritage,” in 2008 IEEE International Conference on
Distributed Human-Machine Systems. Athens, Greece: IEEE, 2008, pp.
1-6.

[8]  R. K. Loverance, “COMPASS: A New Direction for the British
Museum,” COMPUTERS AND THE HISTORY OF ART, vol. 8, pp. 5–
12, 1998.

[9]  B. LeVitus, “Musée du Louvre,” in Incredible iPhone Apps For
Dummies, Canade: Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2010, pp. 36-37.

[10] “The Metropolitan Museum of Art annual report for the Year 2010-
2011,” New York, USA, 2011.

[11] C. Scott, “Advocating the value of museums,” Proc. of
INTERCOM/ICOM, Austria, Vienna, no. August, pp. 1-11, 2007.

[12] G. Coulter-Smith, Deconstructing Installation Art: Fine Art and Media
Art, 1986-2006. Southampton: CASIAD, 2006.

[13]  J. H. Falk and L. D. Dierking, Learning from museums: Visitor
experiences and the making of meaning. Altamira Pr, 2000.

[14] V. Beer, “Great expectations: do museums know what visitors are
doing?,” Curator: The Museum Journal, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 206–215,
1987.

[15] E. H. Gurian, “A Blurring of the Boundaries,” Curator: The Museum
Journal, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 31-37, Mar. 1995.

[16] Y. Wang, N. Stash, and R. Sambeek, “Cultivating personalized
museum tours online and on-site,” Interdisciplinary, vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
139–153, 2009.

[17] Z. Pousman, J. Stasko, and M. Mateas, “Casual information
visualization: depictions of data in everyday life.,” IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1145-52,
2007.

[18] U. Hinrichs, H. Schmidt, and S. Carpendale, “EMDialog: bringing
information visualization into the museum.,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1181-1188,
2008.

[19] D. Riecken and others, “Personalized views of personalization,”

Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 27–28, 2000.

[20] S. F. Fantoni, “Visiting with a personal touch: a guide to
personalization in museums,” Maastricht McLuhan Institute, 2002.

[21] D. Huynh, S. Mazzocchi, and D. Karger, “Piggy Bank: Experience the
Semantic Web inside your web browser,” Web Semantics: Science,
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 16-27,
Mar. 2007.

[22] O. Lassila, “Resource description framework (RDF) model and syntax
specification. W3C Recommendation, 1999,” Available on-line at www.
w3.  org, 1999. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/PR-rdf-
syntax/. [Accessed: 29-Nov-2011].

[23] W3C, “OWL 2 Web Ontology Language: Document Overview,” W3C
Recommendation, Oct, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/. [Accessed: 29-Nov-2011].

[24] “The Friend of a Friend (FOAF) project | FOAF project.” [Online].
Available: http://www.foaf-project.org/. [Accessed: 29-Nov-2011].

[25] A. Miles and S. Bechhofer, “SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization
System Reference,” W3C Recommendation, 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/.

[26] M. Doerr, “Electronic Communication on Diverse Data-The Role of the
oo CIDOC Rference Model,” Communication, 1998.

[27]  M. Spasojevic and T. Kindberg, “A study of an augmented museum
experience,” Hewlett Packard internal technical report, 2001.

[28] R. T. Azuma, “A survey of augmented reality,” Presence-Teleoperators
and Virtual Environments, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 355–385, 1997.

[29] M. Flintham et al., “Flypad: Designing Trajectories in a Large-Scale
Permanent Augmented Reality Installation,” in ECSCW 2011:
Proceedings  of the 12th European Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, 2011, pp. 233-252.

[30] O. Bimber, L. M. Encarnação, and D. Schmalstieg, The virtual
showcase as a new platform for augmented reality digital storytelling.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2003, pp. 87-95.

[31] HighBeam Business, “Museums and Art Galleries market report,” 2012.
[Online]. Available: http://business.highbeam.com/industry-
reports/business/museums-art-galleries. [Accessed: 10-Jan-2012].

[32] M. Douglas and B. C. Isherwood, The World of Goods, Toward an
Anthropology of Consumption. New York, USA: Routledge, 1979.

[33] D. Giaretta, “Preservation workflows, strategies and infrastructure,”

Proceedings of DigCCurr, pp. 177–184, 2009.

