Building Virtual and Augmented Reality Museum Exhibitions

Rafaá Wojciechowski*, Krzysztof Walczak*, Martin White†, Wojciech Cellary*

* Department of Information Technology, The Poznan University of Economics, 
Poland

† Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, UK


Abstract

A system that allows museums to build and manage Virtual and
Augmented Reality exhibitions based on 3D models of artifacts is
presented. Dynamic content creation based on pre-designed
visualization templates allows content designers to create virtual
exhibitions very efficiently. Virtual Reality exhibitions can be
presented both inside museums, e.g. on touch-screen displays
installed inside galleries and, at the same time, on the Internet.
Additionally, the presentation based on Augmented Reality
technologies allows museum visitors to interact with the content
in an intuitive and exciting manner.

CR Categories: I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism – Virtual reality; K.3.1 [Computers and
Education]: Computer Uses in Education - Collaborative learning,
Distance  learning;  H.5.1  [Information  Interfaces  and
Presentation]: Multimedia Information Systems – Artificial,
augmented, and virtual realities; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and
Presentation]: User Interfaces – Graphical user interfaces (GUI),
Input devices and strategies, Interaction styles

Keywords: Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, VRML, Cultural
Heritage

1 Introduction

Virtual Reality (VR) technology has already reached the level of
maturity allowing it to be introduced into real life applications
such as medicine, education and cultural heritage. Recently,
significant research effort has been also made in the area of
Augmented Reality (AR). AR extends VR systems with the
support for blending real and virtual elements into seamless
composite scenes. By combining Virtual Reality with video
processing and computer vision techniques, AR systems offer a
natural view of real scenes enriched with virtual objects.

Virtual and Augmented Reality are promising technologies that
can have wide impact on many domains also those not commonly
associated with computer technologies. One of such domains is
cultural heritage. Most museums do not have the space and
resources required to exhibit their whole collections. In addition,

* e-mail: [wojciechowski, walczak, cellary]@kti.ae.poznan.pl

† e-mail: m.white@sussex.ac.uk

Copyright © 2004 by the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed
for commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the
first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on
servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee.
Request permissions from Permissions Dept, ACM Inc., fax +1 (212) 869-0481 or 
e-mail
permissions@acm.org.

© 2004 ACM 1-58113-845-8/04/0004 $5.00

the nature and fragility of some objects prevent museum curators
from making them available to the public. Also, the interaction of
museum visitors with the exhibited artifacts is very restricted, e.g.
they cannot look at the artifacts from all angles, compare the
artifacts, or study them in different contexts. In this respect,
Virtual and Augmented Reality can offer a great help. These
technologies                        provide solutions enabling visualization of 
3D digital
models of museum artifacts in both virtual and real environments.
They also allow visitors to interact with the models in a variety of
ways.

Museums are keen on presenting their collections in a more
appealing and exciting manner to attract visitors. Some recent
surveys in Europe show that about 35% of museums have already
started (June 2003) developments with some form of 3D
presentation of objects [Tsapatori 2003]. In many cases, these are
only projects at some initial stage, but the number is rapidly
growing and it is evident, that museums start to recognize the
potential offered by these technologies.

Two main difficulties that museums encounter while trying to
widely adopt the Virtual and Augmented Reality technologies in
their standard way of operation are efficient creation of 3D
models of artifacts and building virtual exhibitions based on these
models. Significant research investment has been recently made in
the area of 3D model creation. The technology becomes better,
quicker and more affordable. It is expected that in a few years
museums will be able to easily buy high-quality 3D scanners.

The availability of 3D models is a prerequisite but it is only the
first step. For wide adoption of the technology, museums need
efficient, cost effective and simple methods of creating virtual and
augmented reality exhibitions based on their collection of 3D
models. The work on setting up an exhibition should be
performed by museum staff (e.g., curators), which cannot be
expected to be IT experts.

At the same time, the system must provide museum visitors with
an intuitive human-computer interface based on well-known
metaphors. The users should be able to interact with digital
contents easily and naturally like they can interact with objects in
a real world. Everything that does not meet these criteria will not
be                       understood and, therefore, will not be generally 
accepted.

In this paper, we describe a system, which may help museums to
create Virtual and Augmented Reality exhibitions in a quick and
intuitive way. The system comprises a simple to use authoring
application, which allows content designers to set up virtual
exhibitions in just a few minutes. The exhibitions can be
presented both inside museums, e.g. on touch-screen displays
installed inside galleries and at the same time on the Internet. The
presentation  is  based  on  Virtual  and  Augmented  Reality
technologies and allows visitors to interact with the contents in an
intuitive and exciting manner.


The presented system has been developed as a part of the
European Union Fifth Framework Programme IST project ARCO

– Augmented Representation of Cultural Objects (IST-2000-
28336)                         [ARCO 2003].

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
related projects dealing with Virtual and Augmented Reality are
presented. Section 3 provides a short overview of the ARCO
project. Section 4 explains the concept of dynamic creation of
virtual  exhibitions. Section 5 gives a short overview of
implemented user interfaces. More detailed description of the
Virtual and Augmented Reality exhibitions can be found in
Sections 6 and 7, respectively. Also in Section 7, an application of
the system in the educational domain is presented. Section 8
concludes the paper and indicates future work.

2 Related Work

There are numerous examples of research on using Virtual and
Augmented Reality. However, few projects use these technologies
in the cultural heritage sector, and only some of them focus on
real exploitation of the results. Before we describe our approach
we briefly survey related projects that utilize VR or AR for
cultural heritage applications.

The SCULPTEUR project – Semantic and content-based
multimedia exploitation for European benefit – is developing a
solution for museums to create and manipulate digital
representations of museum objects. SCULPTEUR utilizes multi-
stereo  and silhouette techniques to create 3D museum object
reconstructions stored in a database together with other
multimedia data. The project is also aimed at developing a
semantic layer providing a variety of search and content analysis
opportunities. Moreover, the system gives users seamless access
to   the distributed databases of cultural data by offering a set of
tools encompassing educational software products [SCULPTEUR
2003].

Another example of an outdoor solution is the Ename 974 project
aimed at virtual reconstruction of an extensive archaeological site
located at Ename, Belgium [Ename 974 2003]. Visitors are
offered with virtual reconstruction of early-medieval buildings in
stationary AR kiosks. Users can see visualizations of virtual
models overlaid on video data captured by a camera. Using touch
screen displays they can control the camera and the displayed
data.

Another group of systems exploiting AR techniques to visualize
cultural heritage encompasses indoor applications. An example of
such a system is the Virtual Dig Experience installed in the Seattle
Art Museum [Virtual Dig 2003]. Using VR and AR techniques
visitors,  particularly  children,  can  discover  artifacts for
themselves. Users are presented not only with the artifacts but
also with their archaeological context. Real objects such as
brushes and small shovels are used for user interaction. The
Virtual Dig has been developed based on the HI-SPACE [HI-
SPACE                         2003] and ARToolKit [ARToolKit 2003] packages.

The Virtual Showcase project [Bimber et al. 2003; Virtual
Showcases 2003] is intended to eliminate the necessity of using
unusual methods of presenting cultural objects, which is one of
the weaknesses of most VR and AR systems. The project aims at
integrating the AR technology into a traditional museum
showcase format. Virtual images can be projected on the sides of
a specially designed showcase allowing users to explore both the
real objects and their virtual representations.

3 ARCO System Overview

The ARCO project – Augmented Representation of Cultural
Objects – aims at developing the whole chain of technologies to
help museums to create, manipulate, manage and present digitized
cultural objects in virtual exhibitions accessible both inside and
outside museums. The overall architecture of the ARCO system is
presented                          in Figure 1.


The 3D Murale project – 3D Measurement and Virtual
Reconstruction of Ancient Lost Worlds of Europe – is aimed at
developing a system capable of recording archaeology excavation
phases using Virtual Reality techniques. In addition to the artifacts
also stratigraphical layers can be modeled. This requires utilizing
diverse 3D capture techniques. Furthermore, the project offers the
reconstruction of excavated remains of pottery, sculptures and
buildings as well as their visualization in a way as they possibly
looked like throughout ages [3D Murale 2003].

In recent research on exploitation of modern technologies in
cultural heritage, an increasing role of Augmented Reality can be
observed. A notable example is the ARCHEOGUIDE project
intended to develop a wearable AR tour guide at cultural heritage
sites [ARCHEOGUIDE 2003]. ARCHEOGUIDE allows visitors

Content
Production

Acquisition

Modeling

Refinement

Content
Management

Designing
Virtual
Exhibitions

Database

Content
Visualization

Web + VR
Presentation

Web + AR
Presentation


to see virtual reconstructions of ancient buildings. A user is
equipped with a see-through Head-Mounted Display (HMD) and
wearable computing equipment. The equipment is responsible for
visualization of appropriate information on the HMD depending
on the visitor’s position and orientation in the site. Similar to
ARCHEOGUIDE  in  terms  of  applied  technology  is  the
LIFEPLUS project. A fundamental difference is the presented
contents that in case of LIFEPLUS additionally encompass real-
time 3D simulations of ancient fauna and flora [LIFEPLUS 2003].

Figure 1. The overall architecture of the ARCO system

The ARCO system consists of three main architectural
components: content production, content management, and
visualization.

The content production includes all tools and techniques used to
create digital representations of museum artifacts. The method of
modeling depends on features of the objects. Objects with simple
geometry can be modeled with a state-of-the-art modeling


package such as 3ds max equipped with a set of additional plug-
ins developed in the ARCO project. The plug-ins simplify the
process of creating virtual models of cultural objects by providing
a user with functionality tailored to perform particular modeling
tasks. Objects with complex geometry are modeled with a stereo
digital camera system also developed within the project. This
system is capable of automatic generation of textured 3D models
from stereoscopic images [Patel et al. 2003]. 3D models obtained
from the object modeling tools may require further content
refinement such as reconstruction of missing parts or repair of
polygon meshes. Repair operations such as merging meshes,
eliminating overlapping polygons, welding and capping holes are
carried out.

Digital representations are stored in the ARCO database and
managed  with  ARCO  Content  Management  Application
(ACMA). Each digitized cultural object is represented as a set of
media objects and associated metadata [Mourkoussis et al. 2003].
Examples of media objects are images, 3D models, descriptions,
movies and sounds. Virtual exhibitions are designed by the use
the Presentation Manager, which is one of the tools available in
ACMA. A designer can easily create virtual exhibitions by
creating exhibition spaces and assigning cultural objects and
visualization templates to the spaces. The cultural objects can be
then visually arranged in the exhibition spaces by the use of a
simple VR authoring interface.

The visualization of the digital representations of museum
artifacts is performed by Virtual and Augmented Reality
interfaces.  The  interfaces  combine  Web-based  form  of
presentation with either VR or AR virtual exhibitions. The Web-
based form of presentation allows users to search and browse the
database contents by the use of a well-known interface, whereas
the VR and AR exhibitions let them examine virtual
reconstructions of selected objects in 3D environments. The
virtual exhibitions displayed in the end-user interfaces are
dynamically generated based on parameterized visualization
templates and the database contents. The use of different
visualization templates and template parameterization allows
different visualization of the same content. The virtual exhibitions
can be also customized for a particular user or created in response
to                           a user query.

4 Dynamic Virtual Exhibitions

The ARCO system uses X-VRML visualization templates to
dynamically create virtual exhibitions presented in the end-user
interfaces. X-VRML is a high-level XML-based procedural
language that adds dynamic modeling capabilities to virtual scene
description standards such as VRML and X3D. The dynamic
modeling  technique  enables  the  development  of  dynamic
database-driven  virtual  reality  applications  by  building
parameterized models (templates) of virtual scenes that constitute
the application, and dynamic generation of instances of virtual
scenes based on the models, data retrieved from a database,
current values of model parameters, query provided by a user, and
user privileges or preferences [Walczak and Cellary 2002;
Walczak and Cellary 2003; X-VRML].

The X-VRML language enables parameterization of the virtual
scene generation process, enables selection of the scene contents
and provides powerful methods of accessing data stored in
databases. The data retrieved from a database can influence the

process of creation of the final virtual scene resulting in
modification of its structure, contents, and appearance.

Although X-VRML provides a generic framework for building
dynamic content templates, its design reflects specific
requirements of database-driven VR applications. Thus, it offers
important advantages over other Web technologies for dynamic
content creation, such as Web page generators or the XSLT.
Applications can use X-VRML processing on both the server and
the client sides. High-level VR-specific elements such as classes
or event handlers make the application code significantly shorter
and more readable. Direct access to databases supports both data
visualization and persistency. The language is by design
extensible allowing creation of advanced domain-specific
modules that simplify the process of designing advanced virtual
exhibitions. The fact that X-VRML is based on XML ensures
smooth integration with new VR and other Web standards.

The X-VRML templates are used in ARCO to generate both the
2D HTML and 3D VRML or X3D contents. By using different
templates the same contents can be displayed in different ways.
Also,  since  the  templates  are  parameterized,  different
visualizations can be generated from a single template when
supplied with different parameter values. The parameter values
are  either  preset  by  an  exhibition  designer  or  provided
dynamically by an end-user.

The use of X-VRML visualization templates enables separation of
the process of designing complex virtual scenes from the process
of creating actual virtual exhibitions, allowing the latter to be
easily performed by museum staff without extensive knowledge in
computer science and 3D technologies. All the visualization rules
necessary to build virtual exhibitions and most of the graphical
properties of the exhibitions are encoded in the visualization
templates. A content designer can create a virtual exhibition by
simply collecting the cultural object models, setting their
visualization properties and creating an instance of a visualization
template, i.e. a template together with values of template
parameters. The process of designing a virtual exhibition can be
performed by the use of a simple 2D application connected to the
ARCO database.

The structure of the virtual exhibitions is determined by the
structure of special exhibition spaces stored in the database. Each
exhibition space may represent an entire exhibition, a part of the
exhibition related to a particular subject, a museum room, etc.
Subspaces may be used to divide exhibitions into smaller parts,
e.g., focused on particular topics. The exhibition spaces are
represented by folders, which may contain two types of elements:

ξ  cultural objects and

ξ  X-VRML template instances.

When an end-user enters an exhibition space, all cultural objects
that are assigned to this particular exhibition folder are displayed
by the use of an X-VRML template instance that is assigned to
this folder. A template instance is an X-VRML template supplied
with actual values for some of its formal parameters. The template
parameter values are provided by a content designer by the use of
the Presentation Manager tool.

Depending on the set of parameters that are set in the template
instance, the end-user may be required (or not) to provide
parameters for displaying the exhibition contents. The following
cases                           are possible:


ξ  Some of the required template parameters are not set – the
end-user must first provide values for these parameters (e.g.,
search criteria) and then the exhibition space may be
visualized,

ξ  All required parameters are set but there are optional
parameters                             that are not set – the exhibition space 
is visualized
immediately, but the end-user may change some of the
presentation parameters (e.g. the default historical period),

ξ  All template parameters are set – the exhibition space is
displayed immediately and the end-user may not change its
parameters.

This flexible assignment of parameter values for X-VRML
templates makes it possible to easily combine search interfaces,
customizable  browse  interfaces,  as  well  as  fixed  virtual
exhibitions.

Due to the X-VRML template parameterization, different
visualizations can be achieved by the creation of template
instances derived from the same template but supplied with
different sets of parameter values. For example, a difference
between two instances of the same template used in two spaces
may be the value of a parameter defining the wall texture.

In order to speed-up the process of designing ARCO virtual
exhibitions and to ensure consistency of presentation in exhibition
spaces, the concept of inheritance of template instances was
introduced. In this approach, if a specific exhibition folder does
not contain its own template instance, the instance contained in its
parent folder is used by default (recursively). This solution
enables using one template instance for the whole tree of folders
in the exhibition, saving the preparation time and ensuring visual
consistency of presentations.

In the ARCO system, the same exhibition may be displayed
differently in different environments by the use of different
visualization templates. To achieve maximum flexibility with
respect  to different visualization methods, the concept of
presentation domains was introduced. A presentation domain is
the environment in which the presentation interface is used.

The current ARCO prototype addresses two Web domains and
one AR domain. The Web domains are: WEB_LOCAL for use on
local  displays  installed  inside  museum  galleries  and
WEB_REMOTE for use on the Internet. The contents for local
displays  are optimized for full-screen use on fixed resolution
touch-screen displays. The contents must contain all navigation
elements and the size of the elements must be appropriate for
touch-screen operation. Since both the hardware and the network
configuration are controlled by the museum, high-quality graphics
can   be employed within the local presentation domain. On the
contrary, the WEB_REMOTE domain provides contents for
typical Web presentations on computers – with different hardware
and software configuration – connecting over the Internet. The
third domain: WEB_AR corresponds to Augmented Reality
presentations used inside the museum. The list of presentation
domains is extensible allowing museums to further differentiate
the method of visualization in different contexts when necessary.

Each X-VRML template is associated with a list of allowed
presentation domains, but each template instance corresponds to a
single domain. In an exhibition space, multiple instances of
templates for different domains may be created, but at most one
instance for each domain. While accessing a presentation, a user

browser specifies which domain should be used. Then, the
appropriate instance of the template is used to dynamically
produce the contents. This permits the creation of different
visualizations  of  the  same  contents  for  use  in  different
environments, e.g. local Web, remote Web, Augmented Reality.

An example exhibition space hierarchy displayed in the
Presentation Manager tool is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Example exhibition hierarchy displayed
in               the Presentation Manager

There are three independent exhibitions set up in this example:
MACE, Sussex Past and Victoria & Albert Museum. The MACE
exhibition uses three template instances for visualization of the
contents in different domains. The AR 4.0 is used for the WEB_AR
domain, Start Page for the WEB_LOCAL domain, and Web
Remote 2.0 for the WEB_REMOTE domain. There are four sub-
spaces in the MACE exhibition space. By default, the template
instances used in the main exhibition space are inherited by the
sub-spaces. However, in the Kitchen Utensils sub-space only one
template instance is inherited (AR 4.0) and two new template
instances are created. Web Local 4.0 is an instance of another
template used for visualization in the WEB_LOCAL domain,
while Web Remote 2.0 is another instance of the same template as
used in the main space, but created with different parameter
values. In the Tudor Times sub-space, two of these template
instances are inherited, while one new instance is used for the
WEB_LOCAL presentation domain. The panel on the right shows
values                              of template parameters set in the template 
instance.

5 User Interfaces

The ARCO system provides two main kinds of user interfaces for
browsing cultural heritage exhibitions: Web-based interfaces
displayed in a Web Browser and Augmented Reality interfaces
displayed in a special AR Application. The system employs a
three-tier architecture as shown in Figure 3.

The  X-VRML  Server  dynamically  generates  contents  for
visualization of exhibition spaces in different presentation
domains based on appropriate template instances. Different
collections of templates are used for the Web-based interface and
for the Augmented Reality interface.


ARCO Database

X-VRML

Server

Web
Browser

The AR Application retrieves the contents generated by the server
and visualizes it in a standard 2D/3D form in the Web browser
component and in an AR form in the AR browser component. For


Cultural
Objects

Web
Templates

Exhibition
Spaces

AR

Templates

X-VRML

Module

ADAM

Module

AR

Application

the AR visualization, a camera and a set of physical markers
placed in a real environment are used. Video captured by the
camera is passed on to the AR browser, which overlays virtual
representations of cultural objects on the video using the markers
for                          object positioning.

A camera and a screen for visualizing cultural objects can be built


Figure 3. Architecture of ARCO visualization subsystem

The X-VRML Server consists of the X-VRML Module and the
ADAM  (ARCO  Data  Access  Module)  subcomponents
communicating with the ARCO Database. Both components are
implemented as servlets connected to a standard HTTP server.
The X-VRML Module processes visualization templates and
generates output in either VRML, X3D or HTML. Templates and
template instances are retrieved from the database by an X-VRML
program stored outside the database. The ADAM module is
responsible for delivering multimedia objects retrieved from the

into a kiosk placed in a museum environment. Also, there should
be an operating space available to users for the marker
manipulation. Based on such an environment several scenarios
can   be implemented. For example, the application can be operated
with a touch-screen display where a user can easily navigate
virtual exhibitions using the Web browser component and display
selected cultural objects in the AR environment. In another
scenario, the AR application can be run on a standard display in a
full-screen mode with virtual models pre-assigned to markers. In
this                         case, users do not have access to the Web 
interface.

database to the client applications.                   As the Web browser 
component a typical Internet browser
window with a VRML plug-in is used, whereas the AR browser is


In the Web-based interface, a user can browse information

presented in a form of 3D VRML virtual galleries or 2D Web
pages with embedded multimedia objects. The Web-based
interface requires a standard Web browser such as Internet
Explorer with a VRML plug-in (e.g., ParallelGraphics Cortona).
This kind of user interface can be used both on local displays
inside a museum (WEB_LOCAL presentation domain) and
remotely on the Internet (WEB_REMOTE presentation domain).

To enable visualization of selected objects in an Augmented
Reality environment a special application, called AR Application,
has been developed. The AR application is used instead of a
typical Web browser used in the Web-based interfaces. The AR
Application apart from displaying standard Web contents is able
to visualize virtual scenes in an Augmented Reality environment
(WEB_AR presentation domain).

The architecture of the AR Application is presented in Figure 4.
The application is implemented as a MFC (Microsoft Foundation
Classes) application integrating a Web browser and an AR
browser  components.  The  application  is  responsible  for
synchronization between the components while a user is browsing
virtual exhibitions in the Web browser. The application keeps
track of the currently displayed objects and provides necessary
information to the AR browser [Wojciechowski et al. 2003].

implemented as a window capable of displaying a video backdrop
with superimposed virtual objects. The AR application utilizes the
DirectShow library for capturing input frames from a camera, the
ARToolKit library [ARToolKit 2003] for analyzing the frames
and calculating marker positions and orientations relative to the
camera, and the OpenVRML [OpenVRML 2003] library for
rendering virtual objects superimposed on the captured video
frames.

6 Virtual Reality Exhibitions

6.1  Visualization Interfaces

Museum objects can be visualized in a Web browser (e.g. Internet
Explorer) in a form of 2D Web pages with embedded 3D VRML
models as shown in Figure 5.


AR Application

HTML/VRML

Viewer
OpenVRML
ARToolKit
DirectShow

Web
Browser

AR

Browser


AR

Installation

Figure 4. Visualization components

Figure 5. Web-based visualization of cultural objects

Users can browse a hierarchy of cultural objects represented as a
tree on the left and display the media objects and associated
metadata available for the selected cultural object by clicking on
different icons at the top of the page. This particular form of
visualization has been designed for remote use over the Internet.


Cultural objects presented in a Web browser can be also
visualized in a form of 3D virtual galleries. Examples of such
galleries are depicted in Figure 6 and Figure 7.

interface, the objects will be located exactly as arranged by the
designer.


Figure 6. Example 3D virtual gallery (see also color plate)

The first picture (Figure 6) presents a generic 3D gallery designed
for presenting cultural objects in a virtual room. In this
visualization, users can browse objects simply by walking along
the gallery and can retrieve more detailed information using
interaction elements integrated into object stands. The second
example (Figure 7) illustrates a virtual exhibition presenting
museum artifacts in a 3D room being a reconstruction of a real
gallery – an exhibition corridor in the Victoria and Albert
Museum                          in London.

Figure 8. 3D visual authoring interface

The authoring interface is based on a client-side X-VRML
processor and an X-VRML model of the gallery extended with
implementation of persistency. As opposed to server-side
processing, which is performed only once and a fixed VRML
model  is produced, in the client-side processor, interpretation is
performed                             on the client side during the whole 
lifetime of the
virtual scene. This allows exploiting the full potential of the
X-VRML language – in particular implementation of persistency
[WALCZAK, K. AND CELLARY, W. 2002].

7 Augmented Reality Exhibitions

7.1  Visualization of Cultural Objects

The Augmented Reality exhibitions require the use of the
specially designed AR Application. To make the navigation
intuitive to the users the AR Application can display standard
Web contents as presented in the previous section. It also provides
a user with a toolbar for accessing standard navigation functions.
Users are able to browse objects in the same way as in a standard
Web browser. If the current exhibition space contains cultural
objects, they are listed on a Web page or presented spatially in a
3D virtual room. An example Web interface displayed in the AR
application is shown in Figure 9.

Figure 7. Example 3D reconstruction of a real gallery
(see              also color plate)

6.2  Authoring Interfaces

In addition to presenting the virtual galleries to end-users, the
Web-based VR interfaces can be also used for authoring virtual
exhibitions. An example authoring interface is presented in Figure

8. Using this interface, a designer can refine a virtual exhibition
created in the Presentation Manager by arranging objects in the
exhibition area. The objects can be positioned by simply moving
them the virtual scene. The changes are automatically recorded in
the database. When a visitor enters the exhibition by the end-user

Figure 9. The AR application displaying standard Web contents


This example, generated based on a 2D visualization template,
represents an entrance to a virtual museum, where a user can
choose one of the four exhibitions available on the right.

In addition to the Web contents, users can examine selected
cultural objects in the AR browser. The AR browser overlays
virtual objects upon video frames captured by a camera giving
users an impression that the virtual objects actually exist in the
real environment and enabling comparison of virtual and real
objects. The AR visualization engenders a sense of real
measurements                           of the virtual reconstructions that is 
difficult to
achieve with pure VR techniques.

The users can indicate where the virtual objects should appear in a
real scene using special physical markers. In ARCO, the markers
have a form of square cardboard pieces with letters and special
signs printed on their surfaces, similarly as in [Kato 2000]. In
Figure 10, an example marker is presented on the left, and a
virtual object projected on the marker is shown on the right.

The AR browser can visualize a wide range of virtual scenes from
visualizations of single media objects to scenes presenting a
number of media or cultural objects. The selection of media
objects and metadata to be visualized and the form of their
presentation are determined by X-VRML visualization templates.

In Figure 12, an example virtual exhibition in the AR environment
is presented. The exhibition contains visualizations of three
cultural objects. Each cultural object is visualized in the form of a
scene comprising two media objects: a 3D model and an image.
The 3D model is rotating so a user can see it from each side. In
addition to media objects, there is also some metadata visualized.
The cultural object name is displayed on the stand, while selected
metadata elements are presented in front of it. Furthermore, there
are also some additional 3D objects such as a stand and a picture
frame that are integral parts of the applied visualization template.
The template parameterization allows a content designer to easily
alter the cultural object visualization. In our example, each
cultural object has been visualized with a different stand height
provided                          as a value of a template parameter.

Figure 10. Virtual object superimposed on a marker

Users can interact with the displayed objects using both the
markers and standard input devices. In the first method, a user can
manipulate a marker in front of a camera as it is presented in
Figure 11 and look at an overlaid object from different angles and
distances. This is a natural and intuitive method of interaction
with virtual contents.


In some cases, however, the presented above interaction is not
sufficient. To allow a user to examine virtual objects from each
side (including bottom) and moving objects relatively to the
markers (possibly static), the virtual objects can be also
manipulated using a keyboard or another input device such as the
SpaceMouse® [SpaceMouse 2003]. The latter kind of interaction
can be particularly important in a museum environment, where
visitors should be restricted in respect of access to standard input
devices.

Figure 12. Simple exhibition built in an AR environment
(see              also color plate)

7.2  Controlling Scene Contents

Users are able to control which objects are present in the scene
using a toolbar with buttons corresponding to the predefined
markers (see top of the application window in Figure 12). If a
marker is associated with a cultural object then a thumbnail of the
cultural object is displayed on the toolbar button instead of the
marker                            icon.

Users are provided with a flexible mechanism of assigning virtual
objects to markers. They can assign a selected object either
explicitly to one of the markers or to the first unassigned marker
registered by a camera. In the latter case, if there is more than one
object waiting for assignment they are queued (see Figure 13). To
register an object displayed in the Web interface for visualization
in AR, a user has to push one of the toolbar buttons corresponding
either to a specific marker or to the object queue.

Figure 11. Real scene augmented with superimposed
virtual models (see also color plate)


Marker detection

/fishbo/fishbo.htm] and “Anne of Cleves House – the history of
cooking in Tudor times” [http://www.sussexpast.co.uk/aoc/
aoc.htm].


If “free” marker
detected and
queue not empty

Object
assignment

The Fishbourne Roman Palace presentation implements an
interactive quiz based on 3D models of excavated remains of
materials used in the palace construction. At the beginning of the
quiz, a user is provided with a welcome Web page, where a brief
story about the palace can be found. Also, the user can read a
short introduction to the quiz including its rules and goals (see
Figure 16).

Figure 13. Object assignment to a marker

A user can remove a virtual object from the AR environment in
two ways. They can uncheck the toolbar button corresponding to
the marker associated with the object or they can use a special
marker designed for removing objects from a scene. Each marker
for displaying virtual objects can be associated with another
marker dedicated to removing assigned virtual objects. The
markers for removing virtual objects are printed on the other side
of the markers for displaying virtual objects. In Figure 14, an
example of a displaying marker and a corresponding removing
marker are presented. The removing markers have distinctive
black borders that allow users to easily distinguish them from the
markers used for object visualization.


Figure 14. Markers for displaying and removing virtual objects

Once a camera captures a removing marker, the virtual object
associated with the corresponding displaying marker is removed
from the AR environment. Thereby, the displaying marker
becomes free so other objects can be assigned to it. Figure 15
illustrates the use of a removing marker.

Figure 16. Learning scenario – welcome Web page

A user can start the quiz by clicking on the ARCO icon. Then, the
application is automatically switched to the AR view. An example
scene presented to the user is depicted in Figure 17.

Figure 15. The use of a removing marker


7.3  Building Learning Scenarios

One of the most important goals of the ARCO system is enabling
presentation of museum artifacts in an attractive manner that
would provide people, especially children, with an incentive to
learn more about cultural heritage. To achieve this goal, ARCO
provides interactive scenarios, where in addition to passive
information browsing, users can also be involved in exercises,
quizzes, games, etc.

The ARCO system enables museum staff to build interactive
learning presentations involving diverse forms of data
presentation such as HTML pages, VRML models, and interactive
AR scenes. Two examples of such presentations are: “Fishbourne
Roman Palace – the construction” [http://www.sussexpast.co.uk

Figure 17. Learning scenario – example question visualization
(see                also color plate)

The 3D model of a construction element and a question are
displayed on one of the markers, while three possible answers are
displayed on three other markers (see the bottom of Figure 17).
The model is being automatically rotated, so a user can see it from
different angles. The model can be also manipulated by moving
the marker. The user can answer the question by turning over one
of the answer markers. Depending on whether the answer is
correct or not, an appropriate virtual model appears expressing
approval or disapproval as depicted in Figure 18. Also, an
accompanying sound can be heard.


Figure 18. Wrong and correct answers


A number of points for each correct answer can be scored.
However, in case of a wrong answer, the number of points to
score is decreased. For each model presented, several questions
can be asked. When all questions are answered the application
automatically switches to the Web browser, where more detailed
information can be displayed including embedded images, movies
and VRML scenes. Then, the user can continue the quiz and learn
more about following objects.

When all objects from the currently selected exhibition space have
been                            presented, the final result is presented on a 
Web page. Due to
X-VRML template parameterization, the content on the Web page
can be different depending on the achieved results. An example
result page is presented in Figure 19. The Web page contains a
short summary of the quiz. A 3D reconstruction the palace can be
also presented as a prize if the scored number of points is
sufficient.

Figure 20. 3D learning scenario – virtual kitchen
(see            also color plate)

The learning scenarios can be created by the use of the ACMA
Presentation Manager similarly as in case of simple virtual
exhibitions. Additionally, in case of the learning scenarios, for
each object the content designer can define how the object should
be presented within the scenario. This can be accomplished by
associating with the object an XML description containing the
presentation information. An example of such a description is
presented in Figure 21.


Figure 19. Example quiz result page

The next scenario is based on a 3D reconstruction of the Anne of
Cleves House kitchen with 3D models of the kitchen utensils as
used in the Tudor times. Users can navigate in the virtual room
and can examine the presented models (see Figure 20).

A user can learn more about particular objects simply by clicking
on them. Then a series of questions is being asked in a similar
way as in the previous scenario. Moreover, a user can hear sound
effects associated with the displayed objects or a story read by a
museum                        curator.

<?xml version="1.0"?>

<quiz>

<tasks>

<task question="What is it?" value="1">

<answer correct="true">A roof tile</answer>

<answer correct="false">Piece of gutter</answer>

<answer correct="false">Part of leg armour</answer>

</task>

<task question="What is it made from?" value="2">

<answer correct="true">Clay</answer>

<answer correct="false">Metal</answer>

<answer correct="false">Stone</answer>

</task>

<task question="How was it shaped?" value="3">

<answer correct="false">Carved with a chisel</answer>

<answer correct="true">Moulded</answer>

<answer correct="false">Cast or smelted</answer>

</task>

</tasks>

<summary>

The imbrex roof tile is made of clay which has bed
shaped by hand./The curved shape was formed around
a mould.

</summary>

</quiz>

Figure 21. Example XML description of a cultural object within a
learning scenario

The object description contains a list of questions to be asked with
possible answers. At the end, a short summary is contained. In a
similar way, the designer can set the logic for each exhibition
space to determine what actions should be taken during the
interactive scenario (e.g., switch between the sub-components,
play sounds, load contents into the browsers, etc.).


8 Conclusions and Future Work

The presented solution for building virtual exhibitions of cultural
objects enables museums to display their digitized collections
using different forms of data presentation such as Web pages and
Virtual and Augmented Reality techniques. The ARCO system
provides a complete solution where museums can decide which
objects, how and where should be published. The choice of the
most suitable presentation techniques depends on a particular
application                         and the target group of users.

The use of X-VRML templates makes the process of building
virtual exhibitions in the museum context efficient by separating
the tasks of designing the visualization and preparation of the
contents. These tasks are performed by staff with different
competence. New virtual exhibitions can be easily created and
existing exhibitions can be modified by the use of a simple 2D
application                       without required expertise in 3D graphics.

All virtual exhibitions in the end-user interfaces are generated
dynamically making it possible to differentiate the contents and
the  way of presentation depending on the parameters provided by
end-users. The use of the presentation domain concept allows
different visualization of the same collections of cultural objects
depending                            on the target environment.

Using the ARCO system, museums can build interactive learning
scenarios, which can transform visitors from passive viewers and
readers into active actors and players. In the latter case, the
learning process is much more effective. Museum curators can
easily prepare customized scenarios suitable for children of
different age groups. Moreover, such presentations can be used
not only within a museum, but also in a school class.

From the end-user perspective, the ARCO system offers a novel
approach for exploring cultural object collections. In addition to
exploring a well-known Web interface, users can interact with
selected objects in Virtual and Augmented Reality environments.
Users can examine and learn about the objects in a tabletop mixed
environment by manipulating digital reconstructions of the
artifacts                              in the context of real objects.

The  feedback  provided  by  museum  users  after  initial
demonstrations of the system proves that the relatively new
Augmented Reality technique is a very good supplement to much
more mature presentation methods such as Web and Virtual
Reality. The solution based on computer vision techniques for AR
makes it possible to avoid using expensive hardware that could be
a  serious  obstacle  from  most  museums’  point  of  view.
Consequently, even museums with limited financial resources can
afford the system and take advantage of the achievements of
Virtual and Augmented Reality.

Future works in the ARCO project include the design of advanced
visualization templates for presenting cultural objects in a more
attractive and appealing way. Also, new learning scenarios based
on the implemented technology will be implemented. The
possibility of using haptic devices and projection hardware in
respect of usability in real applications will be also investigated.
Finally, the components of the AR installation will be integrated
into a more compact form, which could be easier installed in a
real                       museum environment.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded in part by the EU IST Framework V
Programme, Key Action III-Multimedia Content and Tools,
ARCO project IST-2000-28336, and by the EU Marie Curie Host
Fellowship Programme HPMT-CT-2001-00326.

References

3D MURALE. http://www.brunel.ac.uk/project/murale/home.html

ARCHEOGUIDE. Augmented Reality-based Cultural Heritage
On-site                       Guide. http://archeoguide.intranet.gr/

ARCO. Augmented Representation of Cultural Objects.
http://www.arco-web.org/

ARTOOLKIT. http://www.hitl.washington.edu/people

/poup/research/ar.htm#artoolkit

BIMBER, O., FRÖHLICH, B., SCHMALSTIEG, D. AND ENCARNAÇÃO,

L. M. 2001. The Virtual Showcase. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 21(6), 48-55.

ENAME 974. http://www.ename974.org/
HI-SPACE.

http://www.hitl.washington.edu/people/rmay/hispace.html

KATO, H., BILLINGHURST, M., POUPYREV, I., IMAMOTO, K. AND

TACHIBANA, K. 2000. Virtual object manipulation on a table-top
AR                      environments. Proceedings of International Symposium on
Augmented Reality (ISAR’00), 111-119.

LIFEPLUS. Innovative revival of life in ancient frescoes and
creation                            of immersive narrative spaces, featuring 
real scenes with
behaviored virtual fauna and flora.
http://www.miralab.unige.ch/subpages/lifeplus/HTML/home.htm

MOURKOUSSIS, N., WHITE, M., PATEL, M., CHMIELEWSKI, J. AND

WALCZAK, K. 2003. AMS – Metadata for Cultural Exhibitions
using                        Virtual Reality. Proceedings of Dublin Core 
Conference
(DC2003), Seattle, Washington, USA.

OPENVRML. http://www.openvrml.org/

PATEL, M., WHITE, M., WALCZAK, K., SAYD, P. 2003. Digitisation

to Presentation - Building Virtual Museum Exhibitions,
Proceedings                             of International Conference on Vision, 
Video and
Graphics, Bath, UK; Editor: Peter Hall and Phil Willis; July 2003

SCULPTEUR. http://www.sculpteurweb.org/
SPACEMOUSE PLUSXT.

http://www.logicad3d.com/products/PlusXT.htm

TSAPATORI, M. ET AL. 2003. ORION Research Roadmap for the
European archaeological museums’ sector (Final Edition). June
2003. http://www.orion-net.org/

VIRTUAL DIG EXPERIENCE.

http://www.hitl.washington.edu/people/rmay/SAM/SAM.html

VIRTUAL SHOWCASES. http://www.virtualshowcases.com/

WALCZAK, K. AND CELLARY, W. 2002. Building Database
Applications                          of Virtual Reality with X-VRML. 
Proceedings of
Web3D 2002 Symposium 7th International Conference on 3D
Web Technology, Tempe, Arizona, USA, 111-120.

WALCZAK, K. AND CELLARY, W. 2003. X-VRML for Advanced

Virtual Reality Applications. IEEE Computer, 36(3), 89-92.

WOJCIECHOWSKI, R., WALCZAK, K., WHITE, M. 2003. Augmented

Reality Interface for Museum Artifact Visualization. Proc. of
IASTED                             VIIP Conference 2003, Benalmadena, Spain; 
998-1004

X-VRML. X-VRML website, http://xvrml.kti.ae.poznan.pl/


Building Virtual and Augmented Reality Museum Exhibitions: Wojciechowski, 
Walczak,
White,                           Cellary

Figure 6: Example 3D virtual gallery              Figure 7: Example 3D 
reconstruction of a real gallery


Figure 11: Real scene augmented with superimposed
virtual         models

Figure 12: Simple exhibition built in an AR environment

Figure 17: Learning scenario – example question visualization         Figure 
20: 3D learning scenario – virtual kitchen

