A Study of Virtual Reality Experience Value and Learning Efficiency of Museum-
Using                                        Shihsanhang Museum as an example

Peng-Peng Li, Pai-Ling Chang
Department of Digital Multimedia Arts
#1, Ln.17, Sec.1, Mu-Cha Road,
Taipei, Taiwan

886-2-22368225, 886-2-22365694, 18698698151@163.com, ichang@mail.shu.edu.tw


Abstract

The technology development of Virtual Reality (VR) has
always been attention by both the industry and the masses, and
the various applications of Virtual Reality are increasing and
popular. By the influence of science and technology, the digital
construction of museum has become one of the important
projects that are emphasis by the government. To create a
pleasant experience of the museum understanding, providing an
experience with entertaining and education at the same time is
one of the important issues of museum digitalization. This study
use VR experience systems introduced by Shihsanhang museum
in the beginning of 2017 in Taiwan, exploring whether the
incentive of VR experience design improve the value of
museum experience. In addition, to investigate the construction
of VR system will benefit the museum learning.

Key words: Virtual Reality, Museum, Museum Learning, User
Experience

Introduction

2016 has been described as “The Beginning of Virtual
Reality. As a prologue of technology era, VR starts rapidly to
spread to different industry along the information technology
area. Entrepreneurs and companies publish their own hardware
and software equipment successively. According to Consumer
Technology association, the sales volume of Virtual
Reality(VR) helmets has been increased dramatically by 500%
in  2016. The output amount is up to 12,000,000. The estimating
sales could reach to 5.4 billion dollars. VR has become a
highlight of consuming electronic products in 2016. [01]

With the digital age coming, museum combines digital
display for educational purpose in museum has become an
inevitable trend. Museums in different country have already
started to hold exhibitions by using digital collection, digital
marketing and digital technology, such as Virtual Museum,
social net working site, Interactive eBook, Mobile wireless
navigation, Virtual reality and Augmented Reality. By using the
combination of technology and culture relics, museums could
achieve goals, which are to creating a pleasant and positive
exhibition space and to offer a diversely study experience. For
informal learning type of museums, what influence will be
created on audiences’ personal values by using digital
technology in the application of marketing strategies? Whether
the audiences actually gain knowledge from museum through
different digital technology? These topics are all being focused
by museums in recent years. To use the British Museum as an
example, in 2015 summer, British Museum cooperated with
Samsung Electronics by using VR to help visitors experience

Bronze Age. Visitors wore VR helmet and use the helmet to
search website about Bronze Age, to go through the 3D scan
image of collections vividly. By using VR, audience can be lead
into a self-directed learning process, and they can enhance the
memory as the same time. Therefore, using VR to present the
collections has a positive effect on museum learning
experience.

At present, Chinese museums rarely use VR, the high
expenditure and worker’s qualification prevent us from
knowing the system practicality, audience’s response and the
effect of museum learning experience. In my paper, I will
present my study based on two VR experience systems
introduced by Shihsanhang Museum at the beginning of 2017 in
Taiwan. First of all, we observed the reaction of the audience
when using the virtual reality of the scene. And then doing a
questionnaire survey to analysis whether virtual reality system
construction and experience value give the audience a good
technology and content experience, thereby enhancing the
museum's VR operating experience and learning benefit.

Virtual Reality

VR firstly appears in academic application in the “The
Ultimate Display” of Sutherland. This study forms the
conception from both computer screen display and man-
machine interaction aspects, developing the computer image
processing skill, helmet screen, the interactive handle and other
man-machine interactive equipment. [02]

A. VR Definition and Features.

The “Reality” in VR refers to any objects and environments
in physical and functional sense. It could be achievable. It also
could be difficult to achieve or impossible to achieve. The
“Virtual” in VR refers to computer generating. Therefore,
“Virtual Reality” refers to a special environment that is
generated by computer. People could use certain equipment to
“project” themselves into this environment, realize the
operation, control the environment, etc. That means people
dominate the environment. Essentially, VR is a highly
developed computer user interface(UI). It could offer user the
sense of listening, hearing, and feeling and other intuitive,
natural and instant perception as well as interaction， trying to
meet the user’s behavior demands in the maximum degree.[03]

According to functional features, Burdea (1993) suggests to
conclude the important characteristic of VR into “3I”, which are
“Immersion”, “Interaction” and “imagination” [04]. VR is a
technology that generates almost real three dimensional sensory
environments through computer, image identification and
operation processing. It makes user feel like in the middle of the
actions. They can also observe the objective in three-dimension



space immediately without any limitations. Meanwhile, when
user starts to move the position, computer can start to calculate
immediately and transfer the precise image back to user in order
to achieve the profound interaction and immerse themselves
into the sense.

B. The Application on Virtual Reality Technology

Virtual reality technology has been prevalent in every corner
of our daily life, whether in business, medicine, entertainment,
military and other fields, virtual reality has played a huge part
of them, such as commercially virtual shopping, human body
effects in the medical field, human body model creating and
surgery. In the field of entertainment, VR can be applied on
computer games, virtual cinemas, virtual skiing; virtual pilot
training in military fields, military exercises, simulated shots,
etc. At present, virtual reality technology is used in the field of
education as well, such as virtual museums, virtual science
laboratory, virtual teaching, virtual campus, etc. VR improves
the traditional boring teaching mode, so that people can have
more intuitive and profound understanding and memorize
informative knowledge and images.

According to related studies of virtual reality, there are many
mathematical educators believe that virtual reality can improve
the learning ability of children. [05] Some scholars also believe
that virtual reality is an effective tool to enhance the ability of
learning the concept of space. Therefore, they recommended to
use virtual reality in teaching to enhance students' ability of
spatial thinking [06]. Biocca argues that the use of virtual
reality contributes to the development of user’s reorganization
of space [07]. Ferrington and Loge's research found out that
users in the virtual learning environment invested a more
positive attitude and emotion and can fully exert their personal
strengths and abilities in order to achieve the effect of learning
[08]. Ainge, in his research, found out that the use of virtual
reality learning can develop better ability to identify geometric
graphics [09]. Also, the user has a positive learning attitude
when using virtual reality for learning. Above researches can
fully explain the the value and necessity of virtual reality in the
education. we can see the potential use in the future in different
aspects.

C. Case Study of Shihsanhang Museum VR experience

In November 2016, Shihsanhang Museum launched a special
underwater archeology virtual reality (VR) experience. Visitors
wear HTC VIVE helmet display device and feel a vividly
underwater archaeological experience. The content includes
professional  Guidance,  introduction  of  underwater
archaeological overview of Taiwan and interaction with
underwater fish. People can move around to gain a better
understanding of the sea creatures, shipwrecks and related
cultural relics information. VR present the historical relics that
can never see in real life in the audience's sight. It is not only
can inspire the imagination but also can enhance the knowledge
and memory of cultural relics. After starting the virtual reality
experience, the daily 25 experience sessions are full. Holiday is
also behind the demand. Due to the hardware configuration and
maintenance, the current session can only offer four

opportunities. Museum can provide this experience to 100
people per day. So far, more than 10,000 people have used the
system. Therefore, virtual reality experience has much more
value than other form of cultural relics displays.

Museum Learning

A.The Concept and Evaluation of Museum Learning

Brody, Bangert and Dillon [10] argue that the object, time,
content, and implementation of standard school education are
fairly fixed and structured. The judgment of learning
achievement used in the system is based on large-scale samples,
standardized answers and ways that are easy to compare with
each other. However, it is not suitable for museum where face
the public and have time flexibility, freedom of choice and
content  of  the  non-standard  environment  of  learning
achievement evaluation. Self-assessment through the audience
is a more appropriate approach. Hooper-Greenhill et al. [11]
also pointed out that the museum's learning achievement can be
diverse and most of these achievements are based on personal
attitudes, values, emotions, beliefs, etc. which is called "soft
outcomes" and they are less likely to see. Therefore, self-
assessment is easier to evaluate the learning outcome.

This study is based on the general learning achievement
evaluation model "GLOs" (as shown in Figure 2),
commissioned by the British Museums, Libraries and Archives
Council. In this mode, the measurements of the learning
efficiency are Knowledge and Understanding, Skills, Attitudes
and Values , Enjoyment, Inspiration and Creativity and
Activity, Behavior and Progression. And then we use the
questionnaire survey to collect the information that affects the
learning achievement and the effectiveness from the audience’s
perspective, at last, use the results of the study to measure the
effectiveness of the study After experiencing the virtual reality
system.

Fig. 1 Generic Learning Outcomes

Reference- Museums Libraries and Archives Council, 2004
[12]

B. Virtual Reality and Museum Learning

The application of virtual reality technology in museum
display breaks through disadvantages such as the plane
presentation of traditional display mode, the impossibility of
meticulously studied and observed, lack of interest and etc.



Through the virtual reality technology, relics can be changed
into various types of images, such as three-dimensional image,
flat continuous image and animation in order to show their
original appearance. VR not only can break the constraint of
time and space, but also be able to provide a environment that
allows visitors to watch, study and interact at zero distance in
order to improve visitors’ experiences, entertainments and
learning.

Mac believes that the museum's development trends includes
two following aspects: (1) relying on digital technology
interactive display and educational activities; (2) cultural
exhibition will be more realistic due to the introduction of
digital technology (VR). According to the study analysis of the
interactive science center of Australia, the United Kingdom, the
United States and other countries, interactive relics display is
the main presenting form of the museum today. The application
of virtual reality technology will lead people towards the goal of
lifelong learning. The immersive, interactive, imaginative
nature of VR transcends traditional museums display [13].

Method, Tool and Design

A. Method

In this research, the discussion of the system construction of
virtual reality is based on the theory of science and technology
acceptance model proposed by Davis [14] as the basic theory,
according to the GLOS learning achievement model combined
with the questionnaire survey, using two kinds of museums VR
experience system in Shihsanhang Museum as the case study,
collecting learning results from the audience’s perspective, and
conducting pluralistic analyses to identify, measure and
describe the learning results in the museum. This research is
also based on the virtual reality system, user attitude and the
relationship between learning efficiency and user's attitude,

H2: Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on improving the Knowledge and Understanding of users.

H3: Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on improving the Skills of users

H4: Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on Attitude and Values of users

H5: Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on improving the Enjoyment-Inspiration and Creativity of users.
H6: Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on Activity- Behavior and Progression of users.

H7: Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on Museum Learning.

C. Questionnaire Design and Analysis

We obtain survey as a method to conducting this research, by
using questionnaire. The questionnaire contains personal
information of respondents (Age, Sex, Education, Occupation,
Number of Attendance), system construction (Perceived Ease of
Use, Perceived Usefulness ), learning benefits(Knowledge and
Understanding，Skills，Attitudes and Values，Enjoyment、
Inspiration and Creativity ， Activity 、 Behaviour and
Progression). There are 3 parts of each variable.

The questionnaire was mainly conducted with the user of VR
system in Shihsanhang Museum. The total number of
questionnaires was 40, and 38 were valid questionnaires. The
overall response rate was 95%.

Conclusion

TABLE 1 Study hypothesis validation summary

Hypothesis            Result

Virtual Reality system’s Perceived Ease of Use has   All Valid
positive influence on the Perceived Usefulness.

Virtual Reality system construction has positive


referred to the user’s attitude in the technology acceptance
model and three variables mentioned above to propose the
research structure (Figure 2):

influence on improving the Knowledge and

Understanding of users.

Virtual Reality system construction has positive
influence on improving the Skills of users.

Virtual Reality system construction has positive
influence on Attitude and Values of users.

Virtual Reality system construction has positive
influence on improving the Enjoyment-Inspiration and
Creativity of users.

Virtual Reality system construction has positive
influence on Activity- Behavior and Progression of users.

Virtual Reality system construction has positive
influence on Museum Learning.

All Valid

All Valid
All Valid

All Valid

Partial
Valid

Partial
Valid


B. Hypothesis

Fig. 2 The structure of this study

A. Virtual Reality system’s Perceived Ease of Use has positive
influence on the Perceived Usefulness.

The perceived ease of use has a positive effect on perceived
usefulness demonstrates that the museum's perceived ease of
use  in the virtual reality system design is so high that the user
can easily manipulate and understand the content after
experience the system. If the VR system of this study is
intended to be clear and easy for users to understand the
information, it is important to focus on the ease of use and


H1: Virtual Reality system’s Perceived Ease of Use has
positive influence on the Perceived Usefulness.

operability of the virtual design system. As long as the user can
easily get started with the system, the system will be more



popular, and can enhance the effect to convey message or
knowledge.

B. Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on Museum Learning.

(1).Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on improving the Knowledge and Understanding of users.

The virtual reality system allows users to understand the past
knowledge and the meaning of things in a new way. It can help
users to make a detailed observation of cultural relics and to
deepen the memory of the image or image.

(2).Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on improving the Skills of users.

From the services and content provided by the VR system at
this stage, the user can learn how to operate the system under
the guidance of the staff and be able to use the system to learn
to interact with the surroundings, but still limited to the scope of
system content and the range of motion. It can not achieve
communication with others and complete the archaeological
work and other archaeological practical professional and
operational skills. Based on the results of this study, it is
recommended to increase the museum to simulate the
underwater archaeological situation to enhance the user's actual
sense of operation and skills.

(3).Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on Attitude and Values of users.

From the public response, the user all have a good experience
can improve the museum's visit satisfaction, and then
recommend to friends and family. Therefore, the museum can
expand the publicity of this activity, increase the number of
sessions and the number of people. Design of related cultural
products and enhance the museum's economic and cultural
value-added function.

(4).Virtual Reality system construction has positive influence
on improving the Enjoyment-Inspiration and Creativity of users.
From the public reaction of Shihsanhang Museum VR
experience system, virtual reality system information
presentation has a visual appeal. The system is different from
the traditional way. The innovation is that the system is can
reproduce things that can not be reproduced or can not be easily
touched in 3D virtual model and present in real life, and use the
voice, action, visual interaction, to trigger people's imagination
and stimulate their self-creation and learning ability. The
museum can further enrich the experience of virtual reality by
enhancing the experience with excavation, exploration and
puzzle, and improve the user's pleasure, inspiration and learning

creativity.

(5).According to the result of the questionnaire, we know that
there is no obvious difference in their attitude to the
surrounding people or the environment after this experience, but
it   has a significant positive effect on learning about the
knowledge of cultural relics. Therefore, it is recommended that
the museum should increase the interaction between users to
enhance the experience.

References

[1] K. Silano and A. Fried, "Virtual Becomes Reality at #
CES2016," in Arlington, VA, CES, 2015. [Online].

Available:  https:  //www.ces.tech/News/Press-Releases

/CES-Press-Release.aspx?NodeID=b57cfda4-af52-4a3e-
b9a4-1d6bb10310ad. Accessed: Dec. 27, 2016.

[2] Sutherland, 1965, "The Ultimate Display [C]. Proceedings
of the IFIP Congress: 506-508"

[3] Earnshaw, R. A. (Ed.). (2014). Virtual reality systems.
Academic press: 3-15.

[4] Burdea, G. (1993). Virtual Reality System and Application,
Eletro'93 International Conference. NJ: Short Course.

[5] Winn, W., & Bricken, W. (1992) .Designing Virtual Worlds
for Use in Mathematics Education: The Example of
Experiential Algebra, Educational Technology, vol. 32:12,
pp.12-19

[6] McLellan, H. (1994). Virtual Reality and Multiple
Intelligence: Potential for Higher Education, Journal of
Computing in Higher Education, vol. 5: 2

[7] Biocca, F. (1992) .Communication with Virtual Reality:
Creating Space for Research, Journal of Communication,
vol. 42: 4, pp.5-22, 1992.

[8] Ferringtonm, G., & Loge, K. (1992). Virtual Reality: A New
Learning Environment, The Computing Teacher, vol. 19: 7,
pp. 16-19.

[9] Ainge, DJ (1996). Upperness Students Constructing and
Exploring ThreeBrody, M., Bangert, A. & Dillon, J., 2008.
Assessing  learning  in  informal  science  contexts.
Commissioned paper by the National Research Council for
Science Learning In Informal Environments Committee.
Retrieved    April    30,    2008,    from
http://www7.nationalacademies.org/bose/commissioned_pa
pers.html.

[10]   Hooper-Greenhill, E. et al., 2003. Measuring the
Outcomes and Impact of Learning in Museums, Archives
and Libraries: The Learning Impact Research Project Paper.
Leicester: Research Center for Museums and Galleries.

[11]  Museums Libraries and Archives Council, 2004.
Inspiring learning for all. Retrieved August 11, 2006, from:
http://www.inspiringlearningforall.gov.uk/introduction/defa
ult.aspx

[12]  Greeff, M. & Lalioti, V. (2001, September).
Interactive Cultural Experiences Using Virtual Identities.
International cultural heritage informatics meeting, Milan.

[13]  Davis, F.D., Bagozzi, R.P. & Warshaw, P.R. (1989).
User acceptance of computer technology: a comparison of
two theoretical models. Management Science, 35 (8), 982-
1003.

Acknowledgements

This article is grateful to the Shihsanhang Museum for its
support, assistance and cooperation in the course of this
research questionnaire.

