
Interdisciplinary Science Reviews



ISSN: 0308-0188 (Print) 1743-2790 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/yisr20


Cultivating Personalized Museum Tours Online and On-Site

Yiwen Wang, Natalia Stash, Rody Sambeek, Yuri Schuurmans, Lora Aroyo, Guus Schreiber & Peter 
Gorgels

To cite this article: Yiwen Wang, Natalia Stash, Rody Sambeek, Yuri Schuurmans, Lora Aroyo, Guus 
Schreiber & Peter Gorgels (2009) Cultivating Personalized Museum Tours Online and On- Site, 
Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 34:2-3, 139-153, DOI: 10.1179/174327909X441072
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1179/174327909X441072



Published online: 18 Jul 2013.


Submit your article to this journal


Article views: 320


View related articles


Citing articles: 9 View citing articles
















Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=yisr20

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009, 139–153


Cultivating Personalized Museum Tours Online and On-Site
YIWEN WANG, NATALIA STASH, RODY SAMBEEK AND YURI SCHUURMANS
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University Eindhoven, The Netherlands
LORA AROYO
Department of Computer Science, Free University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
GUUS SCHREIBER
Computer Science department, VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
PETER GORGELS
Rijksmuseum Amsterdam, The Netherlands


Web 2.0 — the perceived second generation of the World Wide Web that aims to improve collaboration, 
sharing of information and interoperability
— enables increasing access to digital collections of museums. The expecta- tion is that more and 
more people will spend time preparing their visit before actually visiting the museum and look for 
related information reflect- ing on what they have seen or missed after visiting the museum. It can 
also be expected that museum curators want to enhance visitors’ museum experiences in the more 
personalized, intensive and engaging way promised by an improved Web. In other words, to keep their 
visitors, they should adopt an immersive museum environment that combines the museum Web site 
(online) with the physical museum space (on-site). In this context, the CHIP1 (Cultural Heritage 
Information Presentation) project offers tools to the users to be their own curators, e.g. browsing 
the online collections, planning a personalized museum tour suiting their art interests, getting 
some recommendations about interesting artworks to see, and quickly find- ing their ways in the 
museum. In this paper, we present the new additions to the CHIP tools, which target such 
functionality: a Web-based museum Tour Wizard based on the user’s interests and the Mobile Guide 
that converts the tours to a mobile device (PDA) used in the physical museum space. To connect the 
user’s various interactions with these tools online

© Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining 2009       DOI 10.1179/174327909X441072 Published by 
Maney on behalf of the Institute

140  YIWEN WANG et al.

and on-site, we built a dynamic user model. Online, the user model stores the user’s personal 
background, ratings of artworks and art concepts, rec- ommended or created museum tours. On-site, 
it is a conversion of the online user model stored in RDF into XML format which the mobile guide 
can parse. When the user rates artworks inside the physical museum, the on-site user model is 
updated and when the tour is finished, it is synchronized with the online user model. In such a 
way, we support a ‘virtuous circle’ of the museum visit, which links the personalized museum 
experiences both online and on-site.

KEYWoRDS Online museum tours, Personalization, On-site museum tours,
Mobile device, User guidance


Introduction
In recent years, the purpose of museums has shifted from merely providing static information of 
collections to providing personalized services to
various visitors worldwide, in a way suiting visitors’ personal characteristics, goals, tasks and 
behaviours. Personalization enables changing “the museum monologue” into “a user-centred 
information dialog” between the museum and its visitors (Bowen and Filippini-Fantoni 2004). This 
interactive dialogue occurs not only in the real museum, but also in the “virtual museum” 
(Schweibenz 1998) on the museum Web site. Museums are increasingly experimenting with and 
implementing more personalized and interactive services on their own Web sites. All over the world, 
the number of museum Web site visits is growing fast (Chan 2008). Visitors spend more and more time 
on the museum Web sites, e.g. to discover interesting artworks, prepare a museum tour, or learn 
related knowledge about artworks, usually in relation to a (possible) physical museum visit. This 
brings a great challenge for museums to provide a personalized and extended museum experience for 
visitors in an immersive museum environment, which includes both the virtual museum (online) and 
the real museum (on-site).
In this context, the CHIP (Cultural Heritage Information Presentation) project has been working at 
the Rĳksmuseum Amsterdam² since early 2005, as part of the NWO-CATCH³ (Continuous Access to 
Cultural Heritage) programme. CHIP is a cross-disciplinary research project, combining aspects from 
cultural heritage (museum) and computer science. From the museum perspective, it poses three 
issues: (i) how to acquire visitors’ interests in the museum collection; (ii) what kinds of 
personalized services can be provided on the museum Web site and in the real museum space; and 
(iii) how to link visitors’ museum experiences online and on-site and what approaches can be 
deployed to increase visitors’ motivation to return to the immersive museum environment (online and 
on-site). From the computer science perspective, our main research challenges are: (i) to enrich 
the museum digital collection with semantic structures; (ii) to recommend artworks and related 
concepts in a way suiting different users’ art interests; (iii) to build an interactive and

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
141

dynamic user model that stores users’ various information; and (iv) to create personalized online 
museum tours and to convert these online tours to on-site tours on the mobile device.
To address these issues from both disciplines, we have so far taken the following steps: i) used 
technologies associated with what has been called ‘the Semantic Web’⁴ to enrich the museum digital 
collections by mapping them to existing common vocabularies; (ii) created an interactive user model 
as an extended domain-overlay to acquire and store users’ art interests and other information; 
(iii) developed three different tools within the CHIP demonstrator, namely, the Art Recommender, 
the Tour Wizard and the Mobile Guide. The Art Recommender applies content-based recommendation 
techniques to recommend artworks and concepts based on the user model. The Tour Wizard generates 
personalized online museum tours containing recommended artworks and allows users to create new 
tours by adding/ removing artworks. The Mobile Guide converts online tours to on-site tours on the 
mobile device and guides users’ visits in the real museum environ- ment. Following a user-centred 
design method, we have performed a series of empirical user studies (Wang et al. 2007, 2008a) with 
real users to derive the requirements for building these tools and to access the quality of 
personalization provided by the tools.
In this paper, we focus on describing the creation and conversion of online and on-site museum 
tours implemented in the Tour Wizard and the Mobile Guide tools. The descriptions of the semantic 
enrichment of museum digital collections, the user model and the Art Recommender tool are explained 
in Aroyo et al. (2007) and Wang et al. (2008a). The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In 
the next section, we discuss related work about existing mu- seum tours and then, we give a use 
case of such tours. Following this, we describe how to create online museum tours using the Tour 
Wizard and how to export the tours using the Mobile Guide and give users guidance during their 
tours in the physical museum. Further, a qualitative analysis of these tools is given. Finally, we 
discuss our approach and outline directions for future work.

Related work: museum tours
Museum tours offer visitors a unique experience in the museum and special insights about the museum 
collection. There are mainly four types of museum tour: human-guided tours, audio tours, 
online/virtual tours, and multimedia tours (Wang et al. 2008b).
The traditional human-guided and audio tours are usually available in most museums. In recent 
years, enhanced Web technologies have enabled increasing access to museum Web sites. As a trend, 
more and more museums create online/virtual tours on the museum Web sites for online visitors 
across the world. Besides the online tours, with the support of mobile computer technology, 
multimedia tours are becoming increasingly important to visitors by enhancing their museum 
experience (Anderson and Blackwood 2004).
Many museums offer multimedia tours, which are implemented on different

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

142  YIWEN WANG et al.












ﬁGURE 1 Other multimedia museum tours.
Curtesy of a: Sparacino Flavia, b: Cesare Rocchi, c: Liliana Ardissono, d: The American Association 
of Museums.

mobile devices. These tours strengthen the exhibitions by allowing visitors more informed enjoyment 
and knowledge, hence greater engagement with the artworks (Sakamura 2003). In Table 1, we give a 
brief overview of these four types of museum tour with examples.
Although we explored all four types, our mandate in CHIP to enhance personalized museum experiences 
both on the Web site and in the real museum space dictates a focus on the online and multimedia 
museum tours. From the exploration stage, we found that most online and multimedia tours suffer 
from two main problems. The first is lack of content personalization and dynamic adaptation 
according to the visitors’ interests and the contextual information. Most tours contain a fixed 
list of artworks, which is the same for everyone or for visitors from the same predefined user 
groups (e.g. groups of tourists, students, experts). The second problem is lack of connection 
between online tours and on-site/multimedia tours, which are usually separated into two tours 
without any connections. These two problems became our main challenges in building the personalized 
online and on-site museum tours.

TABLE 1
EXPLORING EXISTING MUSEUM TOURS

Museum and Tour type    Tour description

Rijksmuseum Amsterdam (Human-guided tour)

Rijksmuseum Amsterdam (Audio tour)
The visitor follows a human guide, which selects artworks and gives corresponding information to 
visitors using speech, gestures or extra material
Most artworks are labelled with a number, and are coupled to an audio track on the visitor’s audio 
device
Tate Britain (Online tour)    The visitor sees a virtual museum representation on a museum map.
Rooms can be selected and each room contains a set of artworks

Metropolitan Museum of Art (Online tour)
Van Gogh Museum Amsterdam (Multimedia tour)

Netherlands Architecture Institute Rotterdam (Multimedia tour)
The visitor can select six different virtual reality rooms and then navigate the virtual rooms and 
the artworks inside the rooms
The visitor walks through the museum following a timeline of Van Gogh’s life. Artwork information 
can be seen on a PDA from the artwork list
Artworks have sensors that can be scanned using a PDA. If a sensor is scanned, the corresponding 
information will be presented on the PDA


INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
143

Providing personalized content
For most online and multimedia museum tours, in order to deliver personalized content, the 
visitor’s interests and contextual information are usually required. The user information can be 
inferred implicitly by observing users’ behaviour in the museum or during their interactions with 
the multimedia device; it can also be provided explicitly by the users (Bowen
and Filippini-Fantoni 2004). The data are stored in the user model and are exploited in the process 
of content generation to describe or recommend objects potentially relevant for users.
These types of solutions are quite complex and therefore have been developed mostly in the context 
of academic research. For example, the wearable computer (Figure 1a), developed at MIT Media Lab, 
delivers audio and visual narration adapting to the user’s interest from her physical path in the 
museum and length of stops (Sparacino 2002). The PEACH project (Rocchi et al. 2004) develops a 
PDA-based museum tour application
(Figure 1b), whose content is adapted to the visitor, location-aware and only available in certain 
locations in the museum. The INTRIGUE project (Figure 1c), which relies on user-modelling, 
recommends sightseeing destinations by taking into account the preferences of heterogeneous tourist 
groups (Ardissono et al. 2003). Another application is the iPod Multimedia
Tour (Figure 1d) designed for the Saint Louis Art Museum⁵ by Schwartz and Associates Creative,⁶ 
which won the 2007 Muse Award⁷ (the Saint Louis Art Museum is one of the first in the world to 
offer a tour on the iPod).
For content personalization in CHIP, we built a user model to collect the user’s interests 
automatically from his or her interactions. Based on the user model, we adopted a content-based 
recommendation strategy to recommend both artworks and art concepts, that might be of interest. In 
this way, our system enables the delivery of personalized content.

Supporting the virtuous circle of museum visits
The term ‘virtuous circle’ was coined by Ailsa Barry from London Natural History Museum (Barry 
2006). It means creating a connection between the online (virtual) and the on-site (real) 
information through functions such as bookmarks allowing people to save information of interest 
from the museum interactions (e.g. from Kiosks, PDAs) and accessing it after the visit via e-mail 
or on a personalized page available on the museum Web site (see Figure 2a). The essence of the 
virtuous circle is that the visitor can start the museum tour either from the Web or in the museum, 
and can extend the tour from the Web to the museum and back to the Web, or vice versa.
There are two main reasons to link the visitor’s experiences online and on-site into a virtuous 
circle. First, such linking supports a continuous
learning experience. By activating previous knowledge, it helps retain memo- ries over time, 
enables the person to pursue individual interests, and allows him or her to focus more on 
experimentation, discovery and the aesthetic experience during the visit. Second, it can strengthen 
the visitor-museum relationship by driving traffic to the museum Web site and stimulating further 
interest in the digital collection.

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

144  YIWEN WANG et al.















ﬁGURE 2 (a) Virtuous circle of the museum visit (b) and the GettyGuide example.
Courtesy of a: Ailsa Barry, b: J. Paul Getty Museum and Triplecode.

In practice, there have been several museum projects (e.g. Tate Modern, Science Museum Boston⁸ and 
the Getty Guide⁹) to encourage the exploration of the virtuous circle. As illustrated in Figure 2b, 
GettyGuide has kiosks that allow users to bookmark objects within their collections, and these are 
then e- mailed back. However, commonly these e-mailed bookmarks contain distinct information and 
are not directly linked back to the museum Web site (Barry 2006). They therefore do not really 
encourage visitors to expand or continue their experiences further within the virtual space.
To maintain the virtuous circle, we implemented the distributed user model, which stores a user’s 
various information during the online and on- site museum tour. Once the tour is finished, the user 
model is synchronized on these two different clients (the Web site and the mobile device) for the 
user’s next visit. In such a way, we aim to extend the personalized museum experience in a more 
long-lasting and engaging way.

A use case
To explain a possible scenario, let’s suppose Saskia plans to visit Rĳksmuseum Amsterdam for the 
first time. She does not know much about the museum collection and she has only limited time for 
the visit. Here is an illustrative scenario before, during and after the museum visit.
Before the museum visit. Considering her limited visiting time, Saskia wants to make her visit 
efficient so that she may be sure to see some artworks which are really interesting to her. Thus, 
she decides to prepare herself before she goes to the museum. She checks the museum Web site and 
looks for some artworks that she would like to see. However, the online collection of artworks is 
on the museum Web site, and Saskia is confused by too much information, so she needs 
recommendations of artworks that (i) match her art interests; (ii) are currently available in the 
museum exhibition; (iii) fit her time-constraint.

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
145

During the museum visit. After her preparation, Saskia visits the Rĳksmu- seum Amsterdam. At the 
reception, she rents a mobile museum guide, with audio and with a detailed text description of 
artworks. In addition, Saskia wants to load the data she prepared beforehand. She expects the 
resulting combination of her data and the museum’s to be presented on the mobile device, indicating 
the actual locations of artworks from the tour and the route linking these artworks. During the 
visit, Saskia sees some new artworks and wants to receive more information about them.
After the museum visit. Afterwards, Saskia becomes more interested and excited about the museum 
collection. She wants: (i) to know more about what she has seen in the museum; (ii) to learn new 
aspects about artworks which are related to her art interests; and (iii) to keep up-to-date with 
new artworks being exhibited in the museum which might be of interest to her.

Personalized museum tours
The goal of museum tours within the CHIP demonstrator is to enhance the visitor’s museum experience 
in a more intensive, long-lasting and engaging way, by linking the museum experiences both online 
and on-site. Following a user-centred design method, so far we have developed three tools within 
the CHIP demonstrator in a coherent way, namely, Art Recommender, Tour Wizard and Mobile Guide.
•  The Art Recommender helps users to discover their art interests in the museum 
collection and to store them in a corresponding user model.
•  The Tour Wizard generates online museum tours containing interesting artworks 
recommended from the first tool (Art Recommender). The online tours can be presented both on a 
geographical museum map and in a historical timeline.
•  The Mobile Guide converts online museum tours (generated from the Tour Wizard) to the 
on-site tours on the mobile device, and assists the user to find his or her way during the visit. 
When the tour is finished, it sends the user’s real behaviours to update the user model on the Web 
server.
To further understand the relations among these three tools and how they work together, we give an 
architectural diagram of core components in Figure 3.
CHIP demonstrator is based on a client-server architecture. There are three core components on the 
server-side (Aroyo et al. 2007): (i) Collection data refers to the enriched museum collections 
(Wang et al. 2008a), currently the Rĳksmuseum ARIA database, maintained in a Sesame Open RDF memory 
store and queried with SeRQL. (ii) User data contains user models stored in RDF and tour data 
stored in XML. To be used by the Mobile Guide, the user models currently have to be transformed to 
XML. (iii) Web-based demo compo- nents are the Art Recommender and the Tour Wizard realized as Java 
Servlets and JSP pages with CSS and JavaScript.
Another CHIP client, implemented on a PDA (MS Windows Mobile OS) contains a standalone application 
Mobile Guide. It is an RFID (Radio

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

146  YIWEN WANG et al.
























ﬁGURE 3 CHIP Architecture: Core components.

Frequency Identification) reader enabled device and can work oﬄine inside the museum and 
subsequently be synchronized with the server-side tools on demand. The user model and the tour data 
(both in XML) can be down-
loaded from the CHIP server to the mobile device to be used during the tour in the museum. When the 
museum tour is finished, the user data can be synchronized with the user model on the server. The 
second version of the Mobile Guide is now being prepared and will be implemented on an iPod (Ivo 
Roes 2009).
In this paper, we focus on describing the creation and conversion of online and on-site museum 
tours using the Tour Wizard and Mobile Guide. For detailed descriptions about the Art Recommender, 
the semantic enrichment of the collection (metadata vocabularies) and the specification of the user 
model, see Aroyo et al. (2007) and Wang et al. (2008a).

Web-based Tour Wizard
Based on the ratings stored in the user model, the Tour Wizard automatically generates personalized 
museum tours of artworks. It contains recommended museum tours and user-created tours. The 
recommended tours contain artworks, that might be of interest to the user according to his or her 
ratings of presented artworks and concepts. The user could also create tours by adding or removing 
artworks. The tours can be presented both on the Rĳksmuseum map (Figure 4) and in a historical 
timeline (Figure 5).
Tour Wizard allows users to semantically search for artworks or related concepts to add them to the 
tours. This function is supported by the search

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
147

API of the MultimediaN E-Culture project (Schreiber 2006). For example, user Saskia wants to make a 
tour about artworks created by the Dutch painter Rembrandt van Rĳn. If she searches ‘Rembrandt’, 
the system will return four types of results (see Figure 6a): (i) Creator ‘Rembrandt van Rĳn’; (ii) 
Artworks which contain ‘Rembrandt’ in the title, e.g. ‘The Prophetess Anna (known as ‘Rembrandt’s 
Mother’)’, ‘Self portrait of Rembrandt van Rĳn’ and ‘Study for a statue of Rembrandt’; (iii) Theme 
‘Rembrandt’s cycle’; and (iv) Other creators/ painters who are related to ‘Rembrandt van Rĳn’, e.g. 
his teacher ‘Peter Lastman’, and his student ‘Dou Gerrit’.
To return to Saskia, she wants to see all of Rembrandt’s works and add them to a tour, so she can 
click on the first search result, which is the creator ‘Rembrandt van Rĳn’. The system will then 
present the description about Rembrandt van Rĳn to her and give an overview of all 22 artworks (see















ﬁGURE 4  Tour Wizard: Museum tours on the map.
















ﬁGURE 5 Tour Wizard: Museum tours in the timeline bar.

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

148  YIWEN WANG et al.


















ﬁGURE 6 Tour Wizard: Semantic search function in the Tour Wizard.

Figure 6b). By viewing these artworks, Saskia could add all of them to her Rembrandt tour or select 
some of them to add to the tour.

PDA-based Mobile Guide
To export the online museum tours on the mobile device (PDA) and give guidance to users during 
their visit in the real museum space, we implemented a stand-alone PDA-based Mobile Guide on the HP 
Ipaq device with RFID reader for user-positioning.
Figure 7 illustrates the main functions of the Mobile Guide: (a) select and download online tours; 
(b) set up the constraints of the tour (e.g. time spent and number of artworks to see); (c) request 
and receive detailed information (text, image and audio) about an artwork in the tour; (d) receive 
detailed description about the artwork and rate this artwork on a 5-star scale; (e) indicate the 
user’s current positioning and show the tour route; and (f) retrieve information about the room 
such as the number of tour artworks that are available in the room.
To download the online tours on the device, the Mobile Guide needs to invoke a Mobile data 
application on the server (see Figure 8), which is created for exporting and importing information 
in XML. Then, a Servlet called GetTours will be invoked to fetch the tour data from the data store 
using SeRQL and returns the information to the PDA as an XML file using a DOM approach as a 
separate component called the XML Writer. The
generated XML file retrieves all data from the tours and returns to the PDA. Unlike online tours, 
on-site tours in the real museum space encounter a number of constraints, e.g. the availability of 
artworks, time duration and the
route. In the Mobile Guide, we proposed a mapping mechanism: (i) to filter out unavailable artworks 
from the total set of artworks in the selected tour;
(ii) to allow users to limit the number of tour artworks to see and set up the total time duration; 
and (iii) to link all available artworks and indicate the route for the visit.

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
149






























ﬁGURE 7 Screenshots of the Mobile Guide on the PDA.

In the Rĳksmuseum scenario, each artwork is tagged with a passive RFID tag, which is connected to 
the PDA. We track the user’s position by scanning the location of the corresponding artwork. Once 
the visit is finished, the Mobile Guide interactions are synchronized with the user model 
maintained on the CHIP Web site. As indicated in Figure 8, the synchronization is performed by the 
PostUM Servlet, which receives the user model from the Mobile Guide as a Post variable.

Qualitative analysis
Following a user-centred design method, we have performed a series of user studies to test the 
effectiveness of personalized recommendations generated by the Art Recommender (Wang et al. 2007); 
to explore various alternatives to build a user model representing the user’s interests in a short 
time (Wang et al. 2008a); and to derive requirements for building museum tours (see Related work 
section).
However, it is difficult to perform an empirical evaluation on an application mainly used for 
scientific research in order to access the quality of personalized

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

150  YIWEN WANG et al.










ﬁGURE 8 Download the online tour and update the user model.

online and on-site museum tours provided by the Tour Wizard and the Mobile Guide. The problem is 
the constraints from the museum side, such as permis- sion to use the real museum environment, the 
attachment of RFID tags to artworks in the current exhibition, and the availability of mobile 
devices and related hardware. So we have to augment the user studies with a qualitative analysis of 
personalized museum tours provided by the Tour Wizard and the Mobile Guide, to identify possible 
issues in usability and topics for future research. To support the ‘virtuous circle’ of museum 
visits (Figure 2a), we define four tasks in a predefined sequence and discuss related 
issues/problems in each task. As depicted in Figure 9, the distributed user model plays a central 
role, as it is automatically initialized and updated based on ongoing user interactions on the Web 
server or on the mobile device; and enables the personalization of content.
Task 1: Create an online museum tour on the Web site. The user can visit the museum Web site at 
home and use the online Art Recommender to rate presented artworks and art concepts. While he or 
she rates artworks and concepts, the user model is automatically updated to store the declared art 
interests. Based on the dynamic user model, the Art Recommender will recommend artworks and 
concepts that fit these interests, and the Tour Wizard will generate online museum tours containing 
recommended works and allow for adding/removing artworks. From the previous user study for the Art 
Recommender (Wang et al. 2007), we found that the system efficiently helps users, especially novice 
users to elicit their art interests in the museum collections and recommends artworks in a way 
suiting their interests.
However, as a sequence of recommended artworks, does the recommended museum tours fit the user’s 
interests? Is the selection of artworks representa- tive of the whole museum collection?
Task 2: Convert the online tour for the mobile device. Once the user gets the mobile device (PDA), 
the Mobile Guide will download user-selected online tours and the user model. For the adaptation 
from the online tour to the on-site tour, the Mobile Guide needs to: (i) filter out unavailable 
artworks for the current exhibi- tion; (ii) order available artworks based on the location; and, 
(iii) apply physical constraints (number of artworks and time spent) to adjust the tour. As a 
prelimi- nary estimate, we presume that each artwork takes 5 minutes. However, it might be quite 
different for individuals. Another issue is the user interface on the mobile device, e.g. how to 
present the artworks with different types of information (image, text and audio) on the relatively 
small screen of the mobile device?

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
151


















ﬁGURE 9 Four tasks supporting the virtuous circle of museum visits.

Task 3: Guide the on-site tour in the real museum. During the tour, the user can request and 
receive information about new artworks by reading the passive RFID tag attached to the artworks, 
which also indicates the visitor’s current location. With the support of various wireless 
communication and localization technologies (e.g. RFID, GPS, infrared, Bluetooth), it is possible 
to provide functions that allow social activities for users. Based on the contextual infor- mation 
during the tour (e.g. time, the sequence of artworks, user’s activities), how to dynamically adapt 
the tour? For example, the new artworks the user adds are located in rooms which have already been 
visited, and the user does not have much time left; in this case, how to dynamically adapt the tour 
according to the changes, e.g. plan the new route, arrange the rest of the artworks?
Task 4: Send the tour information to the Web. When the user finishes the museum tour, the Mobile 
Guide will send tour information to update the user model on the Web server. Currently, we only 
store ratings of visited artworks and related art concepts. What are the other contextual 
information items
we need to store from the tour, and how can we use these for content personalization on the next 
visit?
From the analysis, we see that the user model plays an essential role. It stores the user’s 
interactions on two clients (Web and mobile device) and enables the personalization of content. In 
order to enhance the personalized museum tours, we also need to take into account different aspects 
of the user model, like the user groups, the context, device, etc. How to store the user data in a 
standard way that can be shared with and understood by other applications is an important topic for 
further research that we have partially addressed in Wang et al. (2008a).

Discussion and future work
In this paper, we have proposed an approach to exploit personalized museum tours suiting different 
users’ art interests and to link the online and on-site

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

152  YIWEN WANG et al.

tours in an intensive and long-lasting way based on an interactive and dynamic user model. We 
proposed a method to import online tours from the Web server (Tour Wizard) to the mobile device and 
to synchronize user data on the mobile device with the Web server. While moving from the online
to the on-site tours, physical aspects of the museum are considered, e.g. time spent and number of 
artworks in the tour. We presented a mapping mechanism for this conversion. Furthermore, we tried 
to capture innovative new functionality for mobile museum tours like user guidance and user 
positioning. User guidance and user positioning are used to offer museum visitors a dynamic tour 
experience. However, the current Mobile Guide implements a basic use case as previously described. 
In the future, we plan to extend the Mobile Guide with the following features or possibilities.
Dynamic adaptation. When a wireless communication is provided, it brings an opportunity for 
providing dynamic adaptation during the Mobile Guide. For example, the user can immediately receive 
recommended artworks when he or she includes a new artwork during the Mobile Guide. As a result, 
the whole plan of the tour (e.g. the route, total time spent, rest of the artwork in the tour) 
could be dynamically adjusted according to the changes. Or if
an artwork is heavily crowded on view, the system might recommend an alternative tour. One step 
further, because of the limitations imposed by the fact that the user model is based on explicit 
ratings, we might think of observing and storing implicit user information, such as, for example,
how much time the user stands in front of a painting, and use this as an additional source for the 
dynamic adaptation.
A variety of Web applications and devices. The current Mobile Guide runs on Windows Mobile. To 
support a larger spectrum of devices from museums and users, clients for other operating systems 
could be implemented. For instance, to support more smart phones, a Symbian client could be 
developed or to support iPhones, an implementation for Mac OS X could be created.
Wireless communication and orientation. Wireless communication tech- nologies such as Bluetooth or 
Wi-Fi can be used to share data between devices. This allows for providing social functionalities 
like sharing tours with friends or sharing notes about artworks (Graziola et al. 2005) in the 
hotspot area. Additionally, interactive maps and location-based technologies (e.g. infrared, RFID, 
GPS, Bluetooth) can be applied to facilitate visitors’ orientation.
User interaction. The user interactions of the current Mobile Guide on the PDA has been set-up 
primarily to be functional and usable. Special attention is dedicated to support a small touch 
screen controlled by a human finger instead of a stylus. Less attention was devoted to create a 
nice look-and-feel for the user, which obviously will be a major target for our future work.

Acknowledgements
The CHIP project is funded by CATCH (Continuous Access to Cultural Heritage) programme of the Dutch 
Science Foundation NWO. This work is a collaboration between the Technical University Eindhoven, 
the Telematica Institute and the Rĳksmuseum Amsterdam.

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009

CULTIVATING PERSONALIZED MUSEUM TOURS ONLINE AND ON-SITE
153


Notes
1 http://www.chip-project.org (05/03/09)
2 http://www.rĳksmuseum.nl (05/03/09)
3 http://www.nwo.nl/catch (05/03/09)
4 http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?id=the- semantic-web&print=true (05/03/09)
5 http://www.slam.org/ (05/03/09)


6 http://www.sacreative.com/ (05/03/09)
7  http://www.mediaandtechnology.org/muse/ 2007muselist.html (05/03/09)
8 http://www.mos.org (05/03/09)
9 http://www.triplecode.com/projects/getty.html (05/03/09)

Bibliography
Anderson, Paul, and Adam Blackwood. 2004. Mobile and PDA technologies and their future use in 
education. Proceedings of JISC Technology and Standards Watch.
Ardissono, Liliana, Anna Goy, Giovanna Petrone, Marino Segnan, and Pietro Torasso. 2003. INTRIGUE: 
Personalized recommendation of tourist attractions for desktop and handset devices. Journal of 
Applied Artificial Intelligence 17(8): 687–714.
Aroyo, L., N. Stash, Y. Wang, P. Gorgels, and L. Rutledge. 2007. CHIP Demonstrator: Semantics 
driven recommendations and museum tour generation. Proceedings of the International Semantic Web 
Conference (ISWC’07).
Barry, Alisa, 2006. Creating a virtuous circle between a museums on-line and physical spaces. 
Proceedings of the Museums and the Web Conference (MW’06).
Bowen, J.P., and S. Filippini-Fantoni. 2004. Personalization and the web from a museum perspective.
Proceedings of the Museums and the Web Conference (MW’04).
Chan, Sebastian. 2008. Towards new metrics of success for on-line museum projects. Proceedings of 
the Museums and the Web Conference (MW’08), 13–22.
Graziola, I., F. Pianesi, M. Zancanaro, and D. Goren-Bar. 2005. Dimensions of adaptivity in mobile 
systems: personality and people’s attitudes. Proceedings of Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces (IUI’05).
Ivo Roes, Natalia Stash, Yiwen Wang, and Lora Aroyo. 2009. A personalized walk through the museum: 
The CHIP interactive tour guide. CHI 2009 Works-in-Progress and Student Research Competition.
Rocchi, C., O. Stock, M. Zancanaro, M. Kruppa, and A. Kruger. 2004. The museum visit: Generating 
seamless personalized presentations on multiple devices. Proceedings of Conference on Intelligent 
User Interfaces (IUI’04).
Sakamura, Ken. 2003. Personalized digital museum assistant. Digital Museum 2000.
Schweibenz, Werner. 1998. The virtual museum: New perspectives for museums to present objects and 
information using the internet as a knowledge base and communication system. Proceedings of 
Internationalen Symposiums fur Informationswissenschafi (ISI’98).
Sparacino, Flavia. 2002. The museum wearable. Proceedings of Conference on Museums and the Web 
(MW’02).
Wang, Y., L. Aroyo, N. Stash, and L. Rutledge. 2007. Interactive user modeling for personalized 
access to museum collections: The Rĳksmuseum case study. Proceedings of the User Modeling 
Conference (UM’07).
Wang, Y., N. Stash, L. Aroyo, P. Gorgels, L. Rutledge, and G. Schreiber. 2008a. Recommendations 
based on semantically-enriched museum collections. Journal of Web Semantics: Semantic Web Challenge 
6(4): 43–50.
Wang, Y., R. van Sambeek, Y. Schuurmans, L. Aroyo, N. Stash, L. Rutledge, and P. Gorgels. 2008b. Be 
your own curator with the CHIP Tour Wizard. Proceedings of the Museums and the Web Conference 
(MW’08).


Notes on Contributors
Correspondence to: Yiwen Wang, Information Systems Group, Department of Mathematics and Computer 
Science, Techical University Eindhoven, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Email: y.wang@tue.nl

INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE REVIEWS, Vol. 34 No. 2–3, 2009
