IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 14, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2008    
   1181

EMDialog:
Bringing Information Visualization into the Museum
Uta Hinrichs, Holly Schmidt, and Sheelagh Carpendale

Abstract—Digital interactive information displays are becoming more common in public spaces such as 
museums, galleries, and libraries. However, the public nature of these locations requires special 
considerations concerning the design of information visual- ization in terms of visual 
representations and interaction techniques. We discuss the potential for, and challenges of, 
information visualization in the museum context based on our practical experience with EMDialog, an 
interactive information presentation that was part of the Emily Carr exhibition at the Glenbow 
Museum in Calgary. EMDialog visualizes the diverse and multi-faceted discourse about Emily Carr, a 
Canadian artist, with the goal to both inform and provoke discussion. It provides a visual 
environment that allows for exploration of the interplay between two integrated visualizations, one 
for information access along temporal, and the other along contextual dimensions. We describe the 
results of an observational study we conducted at the museum that revealed the different ways 
visitors approached and interacted with EMDialog, as well as how they perceived this form of 
information presentation in the museum context. Our results include the need to present information 
in a manner sufficiently attractive to draw attention and the importance of rewarding passive 
observation as well as both short and longer term information exploration.
Index Terms—artistic information visualization, interactive information visualization, 
walk-up-and-use interaction, public displays.

✦

1 INTRODUCTION
Recently, branches of information visualization have emerged that ex- plore the problem of creating 
information presentations to be acces- sible by people from various backgrounds and with differing 
experi- ences rather than targeting domain-expert audiences. This more ca- sual form of information 
visualization [21] takes place in real and virtual public spaces and faces new challenges due to 
the wide audi- ence for which it is intended. Increasingly, examples of casual infor- mation 
visualizations can be found on the web where visual presen- tations of data are provided that can 
be explored, casually analyzed, and commented on by a large number of people [13, 28]. Casual in- 
formation visualization is also becoming more common in physical public spaces such as libraries, 
museums, and art galleries. In these sit- uations, large display technology can be combined with 
information visualization to provide information access in a more immersive and engaging way [1, 2, 
12, 26]. In contrast to the physical artifacts usu- ally displayed in these public spaces, 
information visualizations can present data that does not have a physical representation. 
Traditionally, this type of information has been presented in text panels. The use of techniques to 
display data visually and the support of interactive capa- bilities offers new potential for 
presenting information at museums.
Previous work has studied large displays presenting casual informa- tion located, e. g., in 
hallways of office buildings, at conference socials, or in student residences [5, 9, 17]. These 
semi-public spaces are char- acterized by a defined audience that broadly shares the same interests 
or background, and by repeating interactions of the same group of people over a long period of 
time. In contrast, the museum context is defined by a diverse audience and short, one-time only 
interaction with museum exhibits [15, 22]. Museum studies have been conducted to in- vestigate how 
people explore museum exhibits [22, 27] and how to aug- ment these with interactivity, including 
physical handles and buttons as well as digital displays [11, 15]. Furthermore, art galleries 
increas- ingly exhibit large display visualizations as art pieces [26]. However, abstract and 
interactive information visualizations that were designed

• Uta Hinrichs, University of Calgary, E-mail: uhinrich@ucalgary.ca.
• Holly Schmidt, E-mail: holly schmidt77@hotmail.com.
• Sheelagh Carpendale, University of Calgary, E-mail: sheelagh@ucalgary.ca.
MMaannuussccrriipptt rreecceeiivveedd 3311 MMaarrcchh 22000088;; aacccceepptteedd11AAuugguusstt 
22000088;; ppoosstteedd oonnlliinnee
1199 OOccttoobbeerr 22000088;; mmaaiilleedd oonn 1133 OOccttoobbeerr 22000088..
FFoorr 
iinnffoorrmmaattiioonnoonnoobbttaaiinniinnggrreepprriinntstsooffththisisaarrtitciclele,,ppleleaassee
 sseenndd
e-mailto:tvcg@computer.org.
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.

to enhance the content of museum exhibitions have not been previ- ously studied in terms of visitor 
interaction and response.
With this paper we contribute to the ongoing research around in- formation visualization in public 
spaces by discussing the unique chal- lenges of museums as an application area for information 
visualization. We present EMDialog, an interactive information visualization that was part of the 
“Emily Carr: New Perspectives on a Canadian Icon” exhibition at the Glenbow Museum in Calgary, 
Canada, as a case study of information visualization in the museum context. Furthermore, our 
observational field study conducted at the museum sheds light into how visitors responded to this 
form of information presentation.
We first discuss the design challenges of information visualization for museum displays by 
providing examples of public information vi- sualizations. We then describe the design approach of 
EMDialog and its interactive visualizations. We present the results of our field study and conclude 
by delineating lessons we have learned regarding infor- mation visualizations in museums.

2  INFOVIS CHALLENGES FOR MUSEUM DISPLAYS
A museum is a unique space where information is presented to the public as physical and, 
increasingly, digital artifacts. The audience in a museum is broad and diverse. People who visit a 
museum exhibition differ vastly in their age, knowledge, and social background. Some people visit 
an exhibition to add to their specialized knowledge, while others seek an entertaining and 
educational experience [15, 22]. This influences people’s expectations of an exhibition and the way 
they ex- plore it. In addition to this, museum visitors are often under pressure because they want 
to see “everything” within a certain amount of time. Due to the wealth of information commonly 
available in museums, ex- hibits are competing with each other for the attention of visitors. An 
exhibit that cannot create an incentive within ten seconds is usually abandoned [15]. These 
contextual characteristics impose particular challenges on the creation of information 
visualizations for museums.

2.1 Appeal
In information visualizations for work applications, the overall func- tionality and effectiveness 
such as optimal data-analysis support is usually prioritized over visual appeal. In contrast, 
ambient informa- tion visualizations for more casual public settings have focused on aesthetically 
enriching the space they are installed in, comparable to a painting or other work of art [14, 24]. 
Similarly, the visual appeal of in- formation visualization in a museum context is highly important 
since it influences people’s motivation to approach the visualization as an ex-

1077-2626/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE  Published by the IEEE Computer Society
Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1182       IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 14, NO. 6, 
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2008


hibit, the amount of time they actually invest in exploring it, and how they perceive and absorb 
the information it is presenting. Visually ap- pealing interactive visualizations for museum and 
gallery spaces have been developed to present data in a more accessible way [1, 2, 18, 26]. In the 
museum installation floating.numbers [1], a “river” of numbers floats across an interactive 
tabletop display creating a moving stream of information. Touching a number reveals textual 
information, pic- tures, or video sequences, accompanied by a subtle animation. This information 
could have been shown in a more space efficient and struc- tured way, such as a data table. 
However, visitors might have perceived this form of information presentation as overwhelming or 
even boring rather than intriguing.
Aesthetics is often discussed in terms of visual appeal [20]. How- ever, the interactivity of 
information presentations challenges this static notion of aesthetics. Appeal in public interactive 
installations is not simply a matter of visual attractiveness but also derives through interaction 
and context [20]. For the design of interactive information visualization in museums we consider 
appeal in this wider sense.
2.2 Data
A wide variety of rich data sets has been visualized in public infor- mation displays. Examples 
include: seismic data in the Breathing Earth display, developed for Japan’s Pavilion in the 
Internet’s World Expo [18], stock market data in Black Shoals [2] exhibited at the Tate Modern 
Gallery in London, captured video data from a gallery entrance way in “Artifacts of the Presence 
Era” [26] presented at the Institute for Contemporary Art, and background details about numbers in 
floating.numbers at the Jewish Museum in Berlin [1].
The data commonly shown in information installations for art gal- leries or trade shows is usually 
not dependent on nor integrated within the surrounding context. In these terms, an independent 
installation could just as effectively be installed in another show or at a different gallery. 
However, in a museum setting the information display might be required to be dependent, e. g., on 
the exhibition content. Thus, one of the design considerations is how the chosen data will 
contribute to, reflect on, or extend the context it is situated in.
2.3 Representation
Visual representations designed for museums face the likelihood that visitors will only spend a 
short period of time with an exhibit and rarely visit it more than once [15]. Therefore, the data 
representation should be intuitive to understand, engaging for exploration, and effec- tive in its 
use of metaphors and themes. Essentially, representations need to be simple enough to have people 
understand the meaning after a short while so that they can focus on exploring the actual informa- 
tion content. This does not mean the simplest solution is always best. It is also important to 
evoke curiosity. Vie´gas et al. use the metaphor of geological layers in sedimentary rocks for 
displaying the history of video data [26]. This abstract data representation was found to be suf- 
ficiently understandable in that people tried to actively manipulate the selection and shape of the 
next picture layer [26]. Also, an intriguing data representation can potentially keep visitors’ 
attention longer and persuade them to explore the visualized data in greater detail [19].
2.4 Interaction Design
The interaction design highly influences people’s overall experience of the visualization. A 
visually appealing information visualization can be experienced negatively if it is hard to explore 
due to awkward interaction techniques. In general, interaction techniques for museum information 
visualizations should be as lightweight and intuitive as possible, based on the “walk-up-and-use” 
principle. Museum visitors are not likely to read elaborate written instructions; rather they will 
use “trial and error” techniques to explore. Also, without the notion of a task, it may be more 
important for the interaction design to imply or suggest possible next interactions. That is, in 
some situations, sequenc- ing may become part of the responsibility of the information designer. 
Sequencing can be prescribed linearly through use of animations. For example in “Black Shoals” [2] 
stock market, changes are presented through continuous animation. People can watch the animations 
and
get a sense of stock market activity but they cannot explore or look at an earlier situation. 
Sequencing can be replaced by a holistic, “all information at once” approach as in floating.numbers 
[1]. People can drill down into details interactively but all choices are available at once. Other 
possibilities exist, such as supporting cycles or the ability to re- turn to previous 
configurations. The notion of information sequencing is important in a museum setting because this 
provides options as to how the information story will unfold.
2.5 Display Technology
The choice of display technology is an important factor that affects many aspects including overall 
visibility, input possibilities, and inte- gration with the other exhibits. Since visitors often 
explore a museum exhibit in groups [22, 27], large display technologies may be preferred over 
smaller displays as they enable the exploration of the visualiza- tion in a collaborative way. Many 
examples show that one of the cri- teria for successful information visualization in museum and 
gallery spaces is to allow multiple people to actively or passively experience the visualization at 
the same time [1, 2, 26]. When choosing display technology, it is important, however, to support 
lightweight interaction with the display, e. g., via direct touch. Especially in public spaces 
where people cannot be expected to be trained in using certain input devices, intuitive input 
solutions are crucial [11, 15].
3 THE EMDIALOG INSTALLATION
EMDialog is an interactive information presentation that was commis- sioned by and installed at the 
Glenbow Museum to enhance an exhibi- tion about the Canadian artist Emily Carr (1871–1945). 
Organized by the Vancouver Art Gallery and the National Gallery of Canada, this traveling 
exhibition presented a selection of Carr’s paintings, craft work, and written publications by and 
about her. Located in a space be- tween the exhibition rooms, EMDialog invited visitors to 
interactively explore two visualizations of the previous and ongoing discourse about the artist 
(see Fig. 1). Before we describe the visualizations EMDialog embodies, we will explain our 
motivation and approach to its creation and provide technical details about the installation.














Fig. 1. EMDialog installation at the museum.

3.1 Motivation and Approach
An extensive and multi-faceted discussion about Carr’s life and work occurred during her lifetime, 
continued after her death in 1945, and is ongoing to the present day. Emily Carr has been discussed 
as a person, an artist, a feminist, an environmentalist, and as an iconic figure in Canadian 
history. Not only have art historians, critics, and bibliogra- phers written about her, but also 
friends, art colleagues, ethnographers, and theorists discuss her life and work. As she was an 
author herself and kept a journal throughout her life, her own perspective adds to this discourse. 
Named based on the fact that Carr used to sign some of her paintings with “EM”, EMDialog is an 
attempt to visualize this diverse discourse/dialog throughout the years in an interactive way.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HINRICHS ET AL: EMDIALOG: BRINGING INFORMATION VISUALIZATION INTO THE MUSEUM                    
1183


Our approach to visualizing this discourse is an artistic one. This manifests itself in the choice 
and creation of the data set we visualize. Reflecting on the exhibition, EMDialog is an artistic 
response to the life and work of Emily Carr. Our goal was to provide visitors with additional 
information about Emily Carr but in a thought provoking manner rather than a didactic one. Engaging 
visitors to explore un- known information and initiating discussion were our incentives.
3.1.1 Technical Setup
EMDialog consists of a large high-resolution interactive display (65” diagonal, 1920 ×1024 pixel) 
designed by SMART Technologies Inc. [25] that is tilted by a 45° angle to resemble a digital 
drafting table. Equipped with infrared lights around the edges and infrared cameras in the corners, 
the display enables direct touch interaction us- ing fingers [25]. Embedded speakers provide 
ambient sounds of birds twittering, water rushing, and wind passing through trees. With the ambient 
sound we tried to convey Emily Carr’s feeling of painting out in the woods. In addition, a large 
projection surface (101 × 56 inches) was arranged on the wall next to the interactive display. The 
projection contained the cloned content of the display making the visualizations and interaction 
with the display visible for a larger area (see Fig. 1).
3.1.2 Data Set
The interface of EMDialog consists of two visualizations that are based on a data set we created 
specifically for this installation. The data consists of statements from various authors about 
Emily Carr and comments from Carr’s own publications, journal entries [8], and auto- biography [7]. 
We also chose a subset of pictures of her paintings and craft work. The selection of data was 
driven by our intent to show a diversity of interpretations. In this regard, it is highly 
subjective and takes only a small subset of information about Carr into account. In total, our data 
set consists of 103 written statements and 71 pictures.
We then integrated the selected data into a contextual framework which evolved from our discussions 
about Carr. Based on the idea of mind mapping [6], the framework consists of six different node- 
link tree diagrams (henceforth trees) where each tree represents one perspective in which Carr’s 
work and life can be interpreted: iden- tity, modernism, feminism, Canadian identity, First 
Nations, and na- ture (see Fig. 2 as an example). Filled with associative terms and ex- pressions, 
the tree diagrams form a contextual hierarchy wherein the collected statements and pictures are the 
children. In total, the tree structure contains approximately 1000 nodes. The content of this data 
set reflects the overall theme of the exhibition by representing differ- ent perspectives on Carr 
over time. Our personal artistic perspective is reflected through the conceptual framework 
represented by the tree. In a way, we are adding to the discourse on Emily Carr, by visualizing and 
reinterpreting it through EMDialog.

dimension by an upright standing tree with branches and leaves. Both visualizations can be explored 
independently of each other, but are in- terlinked through people’s interactions.
The visualizations are based on the “walk-up-and-use” interaction paradigm, that is, interactive 
elements react to simple, direct touch in- teraction. No instruction about how to interact with the 
visualizations is provided to visitors, which leaves the interaction techniques as well as the 
information visualizations open for exploration.
3.2 Visualizing Discourse
Based on the data set and visualization metaphor described above, EM- Dialog presents the discourse 
about Emily Carr along two dimensions: time and context. In this section, we will describe each of 
the visual- izations and how they relate to each other.
3.2.1 Cut Section Vis
The cut section visualization is a visual representation of the discourse on Carr’s life and work 
over time. The time line is presented in the form of a tree cut section (see Fig. 3 and 5 (left)) 
in which each tree ring represents a decade starting from 1890 to 2010. Statements from various 
authors about Carr’s life and work, passages from her own writing, and pictures of her paintings 
are represented by small circles and arranged within the tree rings of the cut section. While the 
state- ments on a tree ring are grouped by theme, their arrangement within a particular theme is 
not ordered. Touching the cut section within a tree ring causes the touched tree ring to visually 
open up through a lens ef- fect. If the finger touches one of the transparent circles within the 
tree ring the associated statement fully reveals itself (see Fig. 3). The state- ment remains open 
when the finger is released from the table surface to enable comfortable reading. The cut section 
allows for both point-and- touch and continuous touch interaction. Statements can be selected by 
simply touching them and releasing the finger from the display, similar to a point-and-click 
interaction on a desktop computer. However, it is also possible to run the finger across the cut 
section while continuously touching. This interaction enables smooth information browsing.
The cut section offers a broad temporal overview of the discourse. People can focus on a certain 
time period to find out, e. g., what kind of paintings Carr created in the 1930s, or they can 
explore how the discourse about Carr has changed over time.




divinity unity
life


spirituality


west-coast
nature
jungle
mountains sea
sky experience
wilderness
wisdom

friends birds
dogs
animals
colour
trees   timber sounds



Fig. 3. Cut section in the EMDialog interface (statement by Carr [8]).

Fig. 2. Partition of the nature tree diagram.

3.1.3 Visual Metaphor and Interaction Paradigm
Since EMDialog was installed within an exhibition that would mainly show Carr’s paintings, we 
decided to use a tree metaphor for our visu- alization, reflecting on the theme in most of her 
paintings. We visually interpret the tree metaphor in two different ways: the temporal dimen- sion 
of the data is represented by a cut tree section and the contextual

Each statement in the cut section has a reference stating the author, title, and year of the work. 
The statements are displayed in a sans-serif font (see Fig. 4(a)) with the exception of comments by 
Carr herself. Inspired by Carr’s use of an old typewriter to draft some of her publi- cations, her 
statements are presented in a typewriter font to give them a distinguishable look (see Fig. 4(b)).
Each piece of information is assigned to one of six colors shown in a circle attached to the 
statement (see Fig. 4). This color indicates

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1184       IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 14, NO. 6, 
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2008









(a) Statement by an author (Doris Shadbolt [23]) about Carr.







(b) Statement by Emily Carr [8].

Fig. 4. Statements by Carr are visualized in distinguishable way.


to which of the six different discourse perspectives the particular state- ment has been assigned. 
The coloring of the information visually in- terlinks the cut section with the tree visualization.
3.2.2 Tree Visualization
The time-based cut section visualization is supplemented by the context-based tree visualization. 
When a statement or picture is se- lected in the cut section located on the left side of the 
interface, the contextually related tree reveals itself on the right side as soon as the selecting 
finger is released from the table surface (see Fig. 5). Similar to the cut section visualization, 
the node-link tree is based on a tree metaphor as it is shown in the form of an upright standing, 
abstracted tree with branches and leaves (see Fig. 6). Each tree node appearing as a circle 
represents a word or short expression. Statements or pictures appear as leaf nodes in the tree and 
are represented by small square icons. The spatial arrangement of tree nodes is based on a radial 
tree layout where leaf nodes are aligned in semi-circles around their parent while the length of 
the connecting line between leaf and parent is fixed for all nodes of one level [3].














Fig. 5. Selected statement [7] and the corresponding tree diagram.

The tree contextualizes statements and pictures by integrating them in a hierarchical graph 
consisting of supporting words and expres- sions. The selected statement in Fig. 5, e. g., is a 
comment by Emily Carr about Eric Brown, the then-director of the National Gallery of Canada. We 
embedded this comment into the “Canadian identity” tree as Brown played an important role in making 
Carr an iconic Canadian







Fig. 6. Tree providing contextual information (close-up from Fig. 5).


figure. In the related tree (see Fig. 6), the corresponding statement icon (the big squared 
document symbol) is connected to “Eric Brown,” “Na- tional Gallery,” “national acceptance,” 
“Canadian art movement,” and finally “Canadian identity.” Following the branches of the tree, 
people can gain contextual information about Carr’s comment about Brown.
Due to the size of our data set it can become difficult to spatially display the whole tree without 
experiencing major occlusion and over- lapping of branches. In order to avoid clutter, a tree is 
never expanded fully. Triggered by a statement selection (touch-and-release) from the cut section, 
only the corresponding node-link tree diagram is shown and it only expands the branches that are 
directly connected to the statement as shown in Fig. 6. The large translucent circles represent 
tree nodes that are fully expanded, the darker colored small circles rep- resent nodes that contain 
hidden children. These nodes can be interac- tively explored through simple touch-and-release 
interaction. Touch- ing a closed node will reveal its children on the next level and, if nec- 
essary, collapse other open nodes based on a degree of interest function and a threshold [10]. In 
this way, people have the possibility of explor- ing the tree of one specific perspective. Certain 
word nodes within the tree may trigger more interest and lead people in certain directions.
Touching a square icon on a leaf node enlarges it in the tree view and reveals the corresponding 
statement in the cut section. This shows how both the cut section and the tree visualization are 
interlinked with each other: selecting information in the cut section brings up the corre- sponding 
tree and selecting a statement or picture in the tree reveals its information fully extended in the 
cut section. Each visualization can be seen as an implicit navigation tool for the other 
visualization.
3.2.3 Relations and Perspective Crossing
Much information in EMDialog is correlated in a way that crosses perspectives. The “nature” word 
map, e. g., has some overlap with the “First Nations” perspective. This contextual overlap between 
per- spectives and information is shown as follows. When statements are selected in the cut section 
that have a correlation with other statements from the same or other perspectives, the 
corresponding statement cir-

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HINRICHS ET AL: EMDIALOG: BRINGING INFORMATION VISUALIZATION INTO THE MUSEUM                    
1185


cles in the cut section are highlighted in the associated color. As shown in Fig. 5, the selected 
statement is related to three other pieces of in- formation from the modernism (green), feminism 
(orange), and First Nations (yellow) perspective. In this way, people become aware of additional 
information that might be of interest to them.
In addition to finding thematic relationships, it is possible to see all perspective trees at once. 
An overview tree is revealed when people make an “empty selection” in the cut section; when they 
touch areas on the tree rings where no information is located. If the finger is then released from 
the table surface, the tree that opens up consists of all possible perspectives (see Fig. 7). This 
overview tree can be explored by people just as the single-perspective trees. Again, the system 
does not allow this tree to be fully expanded, but certain branches are col- lapsed as people 
explore in order to avoid clutter.














Fig. 7. Empty selection in cut section brings up all-perspectives tree.

4 STUDY DESCRIPTION
EMDialog was installed at the Glenbow Museum from the end of Oc- tober 2007 until the end of 
January 2008. During this period of time approximately 29,700 people visited the Emily Carr 
exhibition, not including school or family programs. In the time period between De- cember 18, 2007 
and January 27, 2008, we conducted a field study at the museum on the Emily Carr exhibition floor. 
Our goal was to gain insights into more open ended questions such as:
• how would people approach EMDialog,
• what would draw them toward the installation,
• how would they explore the information visualizations, and
what would visitors generally think of this type of information pre- sentation in the museum 
context.
For this reason, we chose a qualitative ethnographically oriented study method [4]. We observed 
general museum visitors while they were exploring EMDialog as part of their museum visit. A sign 
informed people about the study being conducted. One of two observers would watch people 
interacting with the installation for 2–4 hours per obser- vation day. The observer would sit 
relatively far from the interactive display to interfere as little as possible with people’s 
behavior, making use of the large projection to see how exactly people were interact- ing. 
Observations took place for 15 days during a high attendance period between Christmas and New Years 
Eve and on the weekends in January. To avoid obtrusion as much as possible and due to ethical 
reasons we did not record video or audio data but focused our data collection on written field 
notes. To facilitate this process, we devised observational categories that were subsequently 
refined.
In addition to the open observation we had museum visitors fill out questionnaires in which we 
asked them about their experience with the installation and the visualizations. Questionnaires were 
available near the installation during the whole study period.
In a period of 15 days and 27 observation hours, we observed a total of 267 instances of 
interaction with EMDialog. In addition, 87

questionnaires were filled out by visitors. We analyzed the field notes and visitor opinions from 
the questionnaires based on the open cod- ing method [4] and counted occurrences of certain 
behaviors and inci- dences. The results of the analysis of questionnaires and the observa- tion 
based field notes are discussed below.
5 EMDIALOG IN USE
Our study results are organized as follows. First we describe how dif- ferent types of visitors 
approached and perceived the installation in general. After this, we discuss the various incentives 
that led people to explore EMDialog further. We then consider different styles of in- formation 
exploration we observed and discuss how groups explored the installation in contrast to 
individuals. Finally, we will explain the performance aspect of EMDialog revealed by the study, and 
provide an overview of visitors responses to the installation.
5.1 Types of Visitors
Our study confirmed our assumptions about the diverse audience at a museum and previous results 
from other museum studies [15, 22]. The age of people interacting with EMDialog ranged from 
toddlers to elderly people. Many families explored the installation. Our results indicated a close 
connection between the age of visitors and their mo- tivation to interact with EMDialog. Children 
were very keen on touch- ing the interactive display and would often drag adults accompanying them 
toward the installation. We found adults to be more hesitant and careful in approaching the 
installation. They would often look at it from a distance before deciding to explore it further.
We also found that interest in EMDialog strongly varied between people. Many visitors stopped 
briefly to look at the table or the projec- tion and moved on without becoming further engaged. 
Others came closer and started to read the text panel near the interactive table or a statement 
that was selected in the cut section and moved on. Visitors that started interacting with the 
display were sometimes more inter- ested in the interaction and the visual effects than in the 
content of the visualizations. Especially children and younger adults were fascinated by the 
magnification effect caused by touching the cut section. These types of visitors would also watch 
the little blue dot that was displayed wherever the finger was touching the display following their 
fingers. On one hand, this shows that aesthetic interaction can be an instru- ment to keep people 
engaged with the information visualization even if they are not interested in the content. On the 
other hand, however, fancy interaction techniques can draw people’s attention away from the 
visualization’s content. For information visualization with an edu- cational purpose this could be 
problematic. The interaction time with EMDialog was less than two minutes if people were not 
interested in the content. That is, the novelty of interaction wore off fast. We found this 
short-term interaction in approximately 30% of our observations.
The average interaction time with the piece was approximately two to five minutes which was found 
to be an average amount of time for the exploration of exhibit pieces [22]. From a curator’s 
perspective this shows that EMDialog was a great success as an exhibit. Occasion- ally people 
became really interested in reading statements or exploring themes in the tree and spent up to 15 
minutes with the piece. These varying interaction times indicate that information visualizations in 
museums need to reward both short and long-term exploration.
5.2 Incentives to Approach EMDialog
From our observations and questionnaire analysis, we found that three major factors of EMDialog had 
an effect on motivating people to ap- proach the piece: the display technology, the visual 
appearance of the visualizations, and seeing other people interact with it.
Our choice of technology, the large interactive display and the large wall projection, was the 
strongest factor that drew people’s attention toward EMDialog. Approximately 77% of people who 
filled out the questionnaire stated that it was either the projection or the display that attracted 
them to the installation. This finding is not surprising since both the projection and the display 
visually and physically dominated the space they were installed in. We assume that people did not 
see the visualizations on the interactive display interface right away but were

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1186       IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 14, NO. 6, 
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2008


rather attracted by the physicality of the display and by other people interacting with it. The 
projection, however, displayed the two infor- mation visualizations in a way that made it widely 
visible to people walking through the Emily Carr exhibition. This indicates that not only the 
display technology but also the visual appearance of the visu- alizations provided an incentive for 
people to come closer.
The other factor that led visitors to interact with EMDialog is the honey pot effect [5], that is, 
the tendency of people to pay attention to an interactive system when they see other people 
interacting with it. While this phenomenon has been observed in different public display settings 
before [5, 17], our findings show that it transfers to large in- teractive information displays in 
museum spaces. Approximately 20% of people stated in the questionnaire that they started 
interacting with EMDialog for exactly this reason. During our observations we noticed the honey pot 
effect even in 33% of all observed cases of interaction. Watching other people interacting seems to 
help people understand what the information visualization is about and how it works. The wall 
projection of EMDialog facilitated the observation of people in- teracting with the system. All 
interaction techniques were simple and largely visible which made them easily understandable even 
from afar.
5.3 Data Exploration
We observed certain patterns of how people explored the two infor- mation visualizations and how 
the visual and interaction design influ- enced people’s exploration strategies.
5.3.1 Initial Interaction
Approximately 51% of visitors that interacted with EMDialog started to explore the cut section 
visualization first, while 30% turned to the tree. In the remaining 20% of cases it was unclear 
which visualization was approached first. Two factors seem to have influenced people’s initial 
preference: the appearance of the visualization and previous observations. The cut section visually 
dominates the interface. This could be a reason why it initially attracted more people. People who 
in- teracted with the tree first were presumably attracted by its more struc- tured look. Also, the 
tree’s interaction design is more traditional since its nodes resemble familiar buttons. People 
usually had no problem understanding that direct touch-and-release would expand branches.
However, we found that observing others interacting with EMDia- log influenced people strongly in 
their choice of visualization for first interaction. Visitors often tried to imitate interaction 
techniques they had observed. This became particularly apparent when people inter- acted with the 
cut section first. Many people tried to apply touch-and- release interaction on the cut section 
which worked but in a rather inac- curate and dissatisfying way. In most cases, people eventually 
learned to run their fingers continuously across the cut section for a smoother interaction. In 
contrast, people who observed other people applying the continuous interaction on the cut section 
immediately adopted it.
5.3.2 Exploring Linked Visualizations
The biggest motivation for people to explore EMDialog was to find statements and images within the 
visualizations. From our observa- tions and field note analysis, we found that people used the cut 
section and tree equally for this purpose. However, we noticed that both visu- alizations satisfy 
data exploration in different ways. In general, people seemed to browse through the cut section 
more at the beginning, while focusing on the tree later. We assume that the content of the tree 
with all its associative words and expressions becomes more interesting for people when they have a 
general understanding about the visualiza- tion’s content. For instance, we observed people going 
through the branches of the tree intentionally selecting statement icons from cer- tain themes 
after they had explored the cut section for a while. They seemed to understand the different 
thematic approaches of the two vi- sualizations and used the tree to find information on topics 
that were of personal interest to them.
In 30% of all observed cases, we noticed that people switched be- tween the two visualizations at 
least once. As we had anticipated, the visual links between the visualizations were often the 
reason for this attention shift. While exploring the cut section, people would notice
the corresponding tree and start to explore its branches. Vice versa, touching one of the squared 
symbols in the tree would reveal the cor- responding information in the cut section shifting 
people’s attention toward it. However, we found that another reason people switched be- tween the 
two visualizations was frustration about the lack of feedback. For instance, touch-and-release 
interaction in the cut section would of- ten lead to empty selections, in particular when people 
had not yet understood the encoding of the small circles within the tree rings. If an empty 
selection happened repeatedly, people usually moved over to the tree and tried to find something 
more meaningful there. Similarly, people would shift their focus to the cut section if the 
expansion of several tree branches did not reveal any pictures or statements. Peo- ple who did not 
find any meaningful information in any visualization usually left the installation altogether. We 
observed this incident quite a few times since an empty selection reveals the large all-perspective 
tree. The size of this tree makes it more difficult to find leaves that represent statements or 
pictures—information that was the most inter- esting to visitors. Long searches without any reward 
overly taxed mu- seum visitors’ attention span. Providing meaningful information, such as 
statements or pictures, early on is crucial to keep visitors motivated for further information 
exploration.

5.4 Individual vs. Group Interaction
Previous museum studies have found that visitors approach exhibits mostly in groups [22, 27]. Our 
observations revealed that this is also true for interactive information displays even if group 
interaction is not particularly supported. EMDialog was mostly approached by groups or individuals 
that were joined by acquaintances shortly after starting to interact. Groups of two were most 
commonly observed. Only 33% of the people we observed interacted as individuals with the informa- 
tion visualizations. The technical setup of EMDialog does not opti- mally accommodate group 
interaction since we did not enable simul- taneous interaction by multiple people. This was 
particularly problem- atic when multiple children were interacting with the system. How- ever, this 
did not impair group interaction as much as we had expected. We observed that groups of two to 
three people were often exploring both visualizations in a highly collaborative way although they 
had to take turns. Often, one person would be the main interactor and control the visualization 
while the rest of the group would watch and more pas- sively take part in the interaction by 
pointing to certain visualization elements. Other groups took turns often and managed to 
collaborate quite smoothly. Some people, especially pairs, divided up the display workspace with 
one person interacting with the cut section and the other person with the tree. They would 
sometimes switch places dur- ing the exploration so that each person could interact with the other 
visualization. We noticed that group exploration of the visualizations was always accompanied by 
discussion.
From our experiences with other interactive installations we found that groups coped fairly well 
with the limited support of multi-touch interaction. We assume that this is because of the shared 
unfamiliarity of all group members which caused people to closely collaborate to- gether to find 
out how the interaction worked, what each visualization presented, and how they were interlinked. 
In this regard, the ability to collaboratively explore the visualization might have triggered 
further engagement with the visualizations.
During group interaction we noticed a tendency of group members to temporarily leave the 
installation and come back later to take a turn in interacting or to watch another person 
interacting. This was in par- ticular the case for groups that consisted of more than two people or 
where one person dominated the interaction. Typically the group would briefly explore the 
visualizations together and then individuals would start to leave, watch the projection, or mingle 
on the bench near the installation. Although this behavior is partly due to the lack of multi-user 
interaction support, it has also to do with the presented data in general. EMDialog has a lot of 
textual information to read, which is strongly interest-dependent. However, since groups such as 
fami- lies are rarely homogeneous regarding interest, it seems that individual data exploration was 
sometimes perceived as more enjoyable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HINRICHS ET AL: EMDIALOG: BRINGING INFORMATION VISUALIZATION INTO THE MUSEUM                    
1187


5.5 Performance Aspect
The large display and projection surface made interaction with the vi- sualization quite visible 
which had advantages in regard to evoking cu- riosity and teaching people how to interact with the 
installation. How- ever, this technical setup also imposed a performance aspect to the information 
exploration that visitors perceived as intriguing and awk- ward at the same time. In 14% of all 
observed cases we found that people were clearly aware of themselves interacting in public, visible 
by everybody moving through the exhibition floor. Whenever a person was clearly looking at the 
projection screen while interacting with the display we took this as an indicator for such 
performance awareness. We assume that most people exploring the information visualization were 
aware that other people were observing them because of the large projection even if they did not 
look at it specifically. Some people com- mented about this in our questionnaire. In response to 
the question about what was particularly liked or disliked about the installation one person 
stated: I am “uncertain about the performance aspect—I’m kind of an introvert.” Particularly when 
the system looks new and not much instruction is provided, people often hesitate because they are 
afraid of doing something “wrong.” It appears that figuring out how to interact with the 
visualizations in public was an awkward ex- perience for many people. Some visitors also commented 
on feeling uncomfortable interacting with the display based on their interest be- cause of “not 
knowing whether or not someone was in the middle of reading the projected screen.” Along the same 
lines, another person stated: “I felt I was uncomfortable moving at my own pace because others were 
reading the projection.” Other people would not spend more time with the visualization because they 
felt they “couldn’t due to the line of other interested patrons.” Museum studies have revealed 
people’s awareness of other visitors’ presence and how this can influ- ence the way they explore an 
exhibition [11, 27]. Our observations not only show that these findings transfer to large 
interactive displays at museums but also that this awareness might lead to even shorter ex- 
ploration times that have nothing to do with personal interest in the visualization but with social 
pressure. Rewarding short-term interac- tion by making some information in the visualization easier 
accessible can be a solution to this issue.
From the perspective of the “observers,” one person stated that “watching other people interact” 
was the most intriguing part of EM- Dialog. Indeed, we found when someone was interacting with 
EMDia- log, mostly other people, acquaintances or strangers, would pause and start to watch; either 
in the projection or, coming quite close, directly on the display. This shows that the performance 
aspect has two per- spectives: it might feel awkward to people who are interacting, but it makes 
the visualization more enjoyable for people watching from afar.
5.6 Visitor Response
EMDialog received mixed reactions from visitors. People stated quite explicitly what they liked or 
disliked about the installation. Many neg- ative comments directly refer back to the input 
technology we were using for touch interaction. For instance, people often thought the sys- tem 
“was not working” because they covered the LED lights on the display edges with their hands or 
jackets. Also, people complained that “when more than one person tried to interact with it, it 
would not respond.” These problems could be addressed by using different tech- nology that supports 
simultaneous multi-touch interaction. However, with linked visualizations such as ours where 
interaction with one visu- alization has an impact on other visualizations integrating multi-touch 
interaction would need to be considered carefully.
Elderly people in particular complained about the absence of clear instructions. We sometimes 
observed visitors moving back and forth between the visualization and the text panel next to the 
display in search of instructions. With regard to the content and the actual vi- sualization, some 
people stated it was “too much reading” and “not enough pictures.” Many people clearly favor visual 
information over written text, even if it is presented in a more appealing way. Some peo- ple 
perceived the visualizations as “too complex” or “totally confus- ing.” A few people even 
personally talked to us stating that they would have liked a more traditional information 
presentation that would lead

them through the content in a more structured way. Three people stated that they found the overall 
information presentation “pointless,” indi- cating that they did not understand the purpose of it 
at all.
We also received positive and encouraging comments. People ap- preciated the visualizations for 
enhancing the museum experience by putting “Carr’s work into context.” Many visitors found the 
technol- ogy and the visual information presentation of EMDialog “awesome and cool” or “fun.” We 
also collected statements indicating that peo- ple really understood the visualizations and were 
able to glean some- thing from them. For instance, people appreciated
• the “linking of chronology & concept,”
the fact that EMDialog enabled them to see “more of her work and [to get] a better understanding of 
the time line of her career,”
• that it allowed them “to focus on one aspect/period of her work,”
• that it gave a better “sense of time and place,”
and they found that it “enhanced the museum experience because it presented tidbits of background 
info not available elsewhere in the exhibit.”
The aesthetics of the information visualization enhanced this impres- sion. In general people found 
the appearance of the visualization “graphically appealing” and “interesting.” The tree metaphor 
and the connection to Emily Carr was largely understood. Although the in- teraction techniques can 
be improved on with regard to accuracy and smoothness, they were found adoptable and engaging. One 
person stated: “It took me a while to get the idea (and resist fatigue after spending two hours in 
the exhibit) but it quickly engaged me and was really neat and fun to use.” This statement might 
explain some of the negative comments we received for EMDialog. From the question- naires we 
learned that nearly 80% of visitors approached EMDialog either while they were on their way from 
one exhibit room to the next or at the end of their visit. Our observations confirm this. It is 
possible that some people already felt fatigued from all the impressions they had absorbed from the 
exhibition and were overwhelmed by EMDia- log’s unusual information presentation. More visual 
guidance through EMDialog’s interface could have made it easier for people to under- stand the 
visualizations. For instance, the interpretative character of the visualized information could have 
been reflected stronger. How- ever, the reaction and engagement of the majority of visitors show 
that people were able to interpret the walk-up-and-use information visual- izations provided by 
EMDialog without further instruction which can be called a success in itself.

6 LESSONS LEARNED
Our observations of EMDialog, an information visualization em- ployed as part of a museum 
exhibition where it reflected on the ex- hibition content, provides valuable insights for designing 
information visualizations for museum spaces. While large information displays have been studied in 
semi-public and public settings [5, 9, 17, 26], mu- seum visitors’ responds to and interaction with 
information visualiza- tions within the museum context had not been examined. This section 
summarizes the lessons we learned from our observations.
Rewarding short-term and long-term exploration. The differ- ing background and interest of museum 
visitors results in varying data exploration times. Some people spent little time with the 
visualization, while others examined the data in more detail. Both types of explo- ration should be 
rewarded by information visualizations for museum displays. This can be achieved through the visual 
data representation and the interaction design. A short data exploration could reveal a gen- eral 
overview or brief information snippets while longer exploration could provide deeper insights in 
the data relations and patterns.
Supporting collaborative information exploration. People most often explored EMDialog in groups. 
This finding shows that the observation from museum studies of general visitor interaction [15], 
transfers to information visualizations in museum settings. Therefore, the visual data 
representation, interaction design, and display technol- ogy for information visualization in a 
museum context should support

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1188       IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 14, NO. 6, 
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2008


collaborative data exploration. In contrast to collaborative information analysis applications that 
need to support both work in parallel, and close collaboration [16], our findings suggest that in a 
museum setting close collaborative information exploration preponderates. This needs to be analyzed 
further in future studies.
Making information exploration appealing. In EMDialog our choices around visual appeal focused on 
attracting peoples’ attention, evoking peoples’ curiosity, and keeping people engaged. Our findings 
suggest that using large interactive display technology to present infor- mation visualizations in 
museums gives the visualization a physical presence within an exhibition. This makes it possible 
for people to watch the visualization from afar and with low commitment required to decide whether 
to engage or not. Moreover, it makes data explo- ration widely visible. More than the visual appeal 
of the visualization alone, the observation of other people exploring the visualization cre- ates 
an incentive for people to try it themselves. It needs to be con- sidered, however, that being 
observed by strangers can create negative feelings for the person who interacts. This is a 
trade-off. Although interacting on a large public display always implicates some perfor- mance 
aspect, lightweight interaction techniques and clear visual feed- back might make people feel more 
comfortable and less vulnerable about making interaction “mistakes” in public.
Supporting various exploration styles. The interaction design within EMDialog mostly supports an 
exploratory style of data exami- nation. While the exploratory search was largely a positive and 
reward- ing experience, it was sometimes experienced as confusing and over- whelming. We therefore 
suggest supporting guided data exploration in combination with exploratory search for information 
displays at muse- ums. People that are unsure about the visualization’s content and how to interact 
with it can be guided toward meaningful information by providing visual feedback, e. g., through 
subtle animation sequences. Also, people with clear interests or special questions in mind should 
be able to explore the data based on their own criteria.
7 CONCLUSION
EMDialog is an interactive large display information presentation that was designed to engage 
museum visitors in the exploration of addi- tional information about a museum exhibition. It 
presents two in- terlinked information visualizations of the discourse about the artist Emily Carr 
along contextual and temporal dimensions. This paper contributes to the ongoing research around 
information visualization in public spaces by discussing the unique challenges of museums as an 
application area for information visualization, and presenting a design case study of an 
information visualization as a source of additional exhibition information. Our long-term field 
study conducted at the museum sheds light into how museum visitors responded to our infor- mation 
visualization. Our study results emphasize the importance of rewarding both short and long-term 
exploration of visualizations and supporting more than one interaction style to acknowledge the 
diverse audience at a museum. While the use of appealing information pre- sentations and 
interaction techniques can evoke curiosity and create an incentive to further information 
exploration, it is also important to make the actual content of the visualization accessible. 
Further, en- abling collaborative information exploration supports and recognizes of the social 
aspect of a museum visit. These insights contribute guide- lines for the design of information 
visualizations as part of museum exhibitions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the Glenbow Museum and SMART Technolo- gies Inc. for making this project 
possible. Thanks to all members from the Interactions Lab of the University of Calgary for their 
insightful comments and suggestions and our funding agencies Alberta Ingenu- ity, iCORE, CFI, and 
NSERC.
REFERENCES
[1] ART+COM. floating.numbers. Website: http://artcom.de, 2004. Visited March 2008.
[2] L. Autogena and J. Portway. Black shoals stock market. Website: http://www.blackshoals.net/, 
2001. Visited March 2008.
[3] G. D. Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. Tollis. Graph Drawing: Algorithms for the 
Visualization of Graphs. Prentice Hall, 1999.
[4] J. Blomberg, J. Giacomi, A. Mosher, and P. Swenton-Wall. Participatory Design—Principles and 
Practices, chapter Ethnographic Field Methods and Their Relation to Design, pages 123–155. Lawrence 
Erlbaum, 1993.
[5] H. Brignull and Y. Rogers. Enticing people to interact with large public displays in public 
spaces. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Human-Computer Interaction, pages 17–24, 2003.
[6] T. Buzan. The Mind Map Book. Penguin, 1991.
[7] E. Carr. Growing Pains: The Autobiography of Emily Carr. Douglas and McIntyre, 2005.
[8] E. Carr. Hundreds and Thousands: The Journal of an Artist. Douglas and McIntyre, 2006.
[9] E. F. Churchill, L. Nelson, L. Denoue, and A. Girgensohn. The plasma poster network: Posting 
multimedia content in public places. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Human-Computer Interaction, 
pages 599–606, 2003.
[10] G. W. Furnas. Readings in information visualization: using vision to think, chapter The 
FISHEYE View: A new look at structured files, pages 312–330. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999.
[11] R. E. Grinter, P. M. Aoki, A. Hurst, M. H. Szymanski, J. D. Thorton, and A. Woodruff. 
Revisiting the visit: Understanding how technology can shape the museum visit. In Proc. of the 
conf. on computer supported collaborative work, pages 146–155, 2002.
[12] K. Grønbæk, A. Rohde, and S. Bech-Petersen. Infogallery: Informative art services for physical 
library spaces. In Proc. of the Joint Conf. on Digital Libraries, pages 21–30, 2006.
[13] J. Harris and S. Kamvar. We feel fine. http://www.wefeelfine.org, August 2005. Visited March 
17, 2008.
[14] L. E. Holmquist and T. Skog. Informative art: Information visualization in everyday 
environments. In Proc. of GRAPHITE, pages 229–235, 2003.
[15] E. Hornecker and M. Stifter. Learning from interactive museum instal- lations about 
interaction design for public settings. In Proc. of the conf. of the computer-human interaction 
special interest group of Australia on Computer-human interaction, pages 135–142, 2006.
[16] P. Isenberg and S. Carpendale. Interactive tree comparison for co-located collaborative 
information visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza- tion and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1232 – 
1239, 2007.
[17] K. Karahalios and J. Donath. Telemurals: Linking remote spaces with social catalysts. In Proc. 
of the conf. on Human factors in operating systems, pages 615 – 622, 2004.
[18] C. Malamud. A World’s Fair for the Global Village. MIT Press, 1997.
[19] D. A. Norman. Emotional Design. Basic Books, 2004.
[20] M. G. Petersen, O. S. Inversen, P. G. Krogh, and M. Ludvigsen. Aesthetic interaction — a 
pragmatist’s aesthetics of interactive systems. In Proc. of the conf. on Designing interactive 
systems, pages 269 – 276, 2004.
[21] Z. Pousman, J. T. Stasko, and M. Mateas. Casual information visualiza- tion: Depictions of 
data in everyday life. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza- tion and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1145—1152, 
2007.
[22] C. G. Screven. Information Design in Informal Settings: Museums and other Public Spaces, 
chapter 7, pages 131–192. MIT Press, 2000.
[23] D. Shadbolt. The Art of Emily Carr. Douglas and McIntyre, 1992.
[24] T. Skog, S. Ljungblad, and E. Holmquist. Between aesthetics and utility: Designing ambient 
information visualization. In Proc. of the IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization, pages 30–37, 
2003.
[25] Smart Technologies Inc. Digital vision touch technology. Website: http://smarttech.com/dvit, 
2003. Visited March 2008.
[26] F. B. Vie´gas, E. Perry, E. Howe, and J. Donath. Artifacts of the presence era: Using 
information visualization to create an evocative souvenir. In Proc. of the IEEE Symp. on 
Information Visualization, pages 105–111, 2004.
[27] D. vom Lehn, C. Heath, and J. Hindmarsh. Exhibiting interaction: Con- duct and collaboration 
in museums and galleries. Symbolic Interaction, 24(2):189–216, 2001.
[28] M. Wattenberg. Babynames, visualization, and social data analysis. In
Proc. of the IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization, pages 1–7, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Haifa. Downloaded on December 24,2021 at 08:57:34 
UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
