Finding Your Way through the Rijksmuseum
with an Adaptive Mobile Museum Guide

Willem Robert van Hage1, Natalia Stash2, Yiwen Wang2, and Lora Aroyo1

¹ VU University Amsterdam

wrvhage@few.vu.nl, l.m.aroyo@cs.vu.nl

² Eindhoven University of Technology

n.v.stash@tue.nl, y.wang@tue.nl

Abstract. This paper describes a real-time routing system that im-
plements a mobile museum tour guide for providing personalized tours
tailored to the user position inside the museum and interests. The core
of this tour guide originates from the CHIP (Cultural Heritage Infor-
mation Personalization) Web-based tools set for personalized access to
the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam collection. In a number of previous pa-
pers we presented these tools for interactive discovery of user’s interests,
semantic recommendations of artworks and art-related topics, and the
(semi-)automatic generation of personalized museum tours. Typically,
a museum visitor could wander around the museum and get attracted
by artworks outside of the current tour he is following. To support a
dynamic adaptation of the tour to the current user position and chang-
ing interests, we have extended the existing CHIP mobile tour guide
with a routing mechanism based on the SWI-Prolog Space package.
The package uses (1) the CHIP user proﬁle containing user’s prefer-
ences and current location; (2) the semantically enriched Rijksmuseum
collection and (3) the coordinates of the artworks and rooms in the mu-
seum. This is a joint work between the Dutch nationally funded CHIP¹
and Poseidon² projects and the prototype demonstrator can be found at
http://www.chip-project.org/spacechip.

Keywords: Interactive museum tours, mobile museum guide, semantic
web, recommender systems, user modeling.

1  Introduction

Cultural heritage and museum collections provide a wide variety of objects,
which could be of interest to diﬀerent visitors. To meet the diversity of 
prefer-
ences and backgrounds of visitors museum curators oﬀer tours on diﬀerent topics.
However, these topics usually are selected based on the highlights of the 
collection
and the resulting tours include a ﬁxed and predeﬁned sequence of artworks to

¹ http://www.chip-project.org

² http://www.esi.nl/poseidon

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part I, LNCS 6088, pp. 46–59, 2010.

 c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010


view. An audio tour provides more freedom in determining your own sequence of
artworks while visiting a museum. However, the set of artworks to choose from is
still a predeﬁned one and is the same for all visitors. Currently, museums turn 
to
multimedia guides in order to bridge the gap between the visitor’s interests and
the static museum tours. Personalization is one way to provide dynamics related
to visitor’s interests, which subsequently could enhance visitor’s experiences 
[5].
An adaptive mobile museum guide acts as a museum expert and provides the
user with information adapted to the current situation [2]. For example, the
MIT Media Lab3 audio and visual narration adapts to the user’s interest ac-
quired from the physical path in the museum and length of the user stops. The
mobile museum guides developed within Hippie [3] and PEACH [4] projects pro-
vide content adaptation based on technical restrictions of speciﬁc presentation
devices as well as visitor’s preferences and knowledge. The diﬀerence between
two projects is that Hippie museum guide uses stationary and mobile devices in a
sequential way (e.g., a user prepares his museum visit on the personal computer
at home and then uses the mobile device while actually visiting the museum), the
PEACH museum guide combines both mobile and stationary devices in parallel.
The mobile museum guide built within Sotto Voce [1] project takes into account
the special needs of groups visiting a museum and facilitates social interaction
between group members. AgentSalon [6] system users are provided with mobile
devices and are monitored while exploring the museum. The system can infer an
overlap between users’ interests and experiences and fosters communication be-
tween the users with stationary devices. ARCHIE [10] provides a socially-aware
handheld guide that stimulates interaction between group members. They can
communicate with each other either directly (by voice) or indirectly (by collab-
orative games) by means of their mobile guides. By using a personal proﬁle it
allows to adapt the interface and tailor the information to the needs and inter-
ests of each individual user. The user proﬁle evolves slowly by observing how 
the
user interacts with the digital content, e.g. asking for more, or bookmarking 
it,
may indicate interest while stopping an explanation prematurely may indicate
a lack of it. The Kubadji mobile tour guide4 aims at deriving visitor’s 
interests
from implicit behavior (e.g. artworks viewing times), recommendation of items
of interest and personalization of the content delivered for these items via the
handheld device. Besides it uses collaborative ﬁltering approach for predicting
visitor’s viewing times of unseen exhibits from his viewing times at visited ex-
hibits. The context-aware museum tour guide presented in [11] is used to give
directions to the visitor and is adjusted as the tour progresses dropping one or
more exhibits if the visitor falls behind the tour or suggesting additional 
exhibits
or taking a break at a nearby restaurant if the visitor has extra time. The 
envi-
ronment also supports peer-to-peer interactions between visitors, allowing them
to ﬁnd each other, share ratings and comments about exhibits. A number of
museums, e.g. Tate Modern, Science Museum Boston, are already exploring the
potential of personalized museum guides, currently available on their websites.

³ http://www.media.mit.edu/

⁴ http://www.kubadji.org/


A major bottleneck in realization of this personalization is how to collect
the necessary information about the user’s (constantly evolving) interests [5]
without intruding on the visitor too much. Typically, for large scale online ac-
cess personalization can be achieved through usage of stereotypes (e.g. 
students,
novices, art experts, children) or through deducing a user proﬁle from observa-
tion of their online browsing and searching (or in museum) viewing behavior. In
this way, personalized virtual tours are ways for visitors to construct their 
own
narratives5. In addition, the indoor localization of people and objects plays a
critical role in order to implement and deploy successfully such a system. Two
tasks are considered in this context [2]:

– Detecting user’s location inside the museum requires a positioning system
that considers the boundaries and constraints (i.e. the walls, doors, stairs) of
the physical indoor space. Methods using diﬀerent hardware solutions have
been proposed to increase the accuracy of the indoor user position.

– Assessing user’s context in terms of artworks in her neighborhood, which
artworks have been already seen by the users, how much time has the user
already spent in the museum and additional temporal constraints (e.g. how
much time is available), what are visitor’s general interests in art, and po-
tentially also their physiological and the emotional state [2].

Having the limited resources of mobile guides in mind, most of representation
and processing of relevant knowledge needs to be carried out remotely in the
infrastructure. To reduce complexity and to ensure reusability of the knowl-
edge representations and inference mechanisms a ﬂexible web-based approach is
required that allows diﬀerent types of systems to exchange and augment infor-
mation on users and particular situations [2]. In the following sections we 
discuss
brieﬂy the CHIP project, the routing mechanism of SWI-Prolog Space package
and pay a special attention to the SPACE-CHIP demonstrator.

2  CHIP Demonstrator

The CHIP (Cultural Heritage Information Presentation) project is a cross-
disciplinary research project, combining aspects from cultural heritage and
information technologies. The team has been working at the Rijksmuseum Am-
sterdam since early 2005, as part of the Dutch CATCH (Continuous Access to
Cultural Heritage) program on techniques to provide a personalized access to the
museum collection both online and inside the museum, therefore also allowing to
link visitor’s experience in both environments. We have used explicit semantics
in order to enrich the museum collection and in this way to be able to discover
relationships between the objects in the collection, and use those to generate 
per-
sonalized recommendations and tours for each user. The main goal of the project
so far, was to explore how explicit semantics can improve the users’ 
satisfaction
with respect to the recommendation of artworks and related art concepts. All

⁵ Virtual Museum (of Canada), http://www.museevirtuel-virtualmuseum.ca/


the CHIP Web-based tools6 for browsing the online collections, planning per-
sonalized museum tours, getting recommendations about interesting artworks
to see, and quickly ﬁnding their ways in the museum use a common distributed
user model, which collects user interaction data and interprets it in terms of
user’s interests used further for generating recommendations and personalized
tours. The Art Recommender helps the user to discover his art interests in
the Rijksmuseum collection and store them in a user proﬁle (also visible to the
user). The Tour Wizard helps the user to generate personalized tours through
the museum based on his user model and visualizes them on the museum map
and on a historical timeline. By default, two tours are generated automatically
for each user based on his ratings–Tour of Favorites containing artworks posi-
tively rated by the user and Tour of Recommended Artworks containing 20 top
recommended artworks. The user can also create tours by searching for concrete

artworks. The e-Culture Semantic Search⁷ open API helps him ﬁnd semantically
related topics and artworks to include in the personalized tours. For example, 
if
the user searches for “Rembrandt” he gets not only artworks created by Rem-
brandt himself but also artworks created by Rembrandt’s teachers and students,

as well as artworks by artists in the same style as Rembrandt. Finally, the Mo-
bile Museum Guide allows users to access their tours created with the Tour
Wizard on their mobile devices in the museum. Technical details about the design
and implementation of the CHIP Art Recommender, Tour Wizard and Mobile
Museum Guide (ver 0.1 and ver 1.0) can be found in [9]. However, so far all
those tools considered only user preferences are constraints for the adaptation.
In order to realize this in the real physical space we need to also consider 
spa-
tial constraints in generating both recommendations and museum tours. In this
paper we propose a method for on-the-ﬂy adaptation of museum tours based on
a spatial model of the museum.

The ﬁrst two versions of the CHIP Mobile Guide⁸ used two diﬀerent hard-
ware settings to allow users to use on their handhelds the museum tours created
with the online CHIP Tour Wizard. The Mobile Guide is implemented as a Web-
based application and is therefore viewable in any browser. For demonstration

purposes we have created also an iPhone simulation of the graphical user inter-
face. The simulation can be used if a user wants to get familiar with the mobile
environment before going to the museum. The Mobile Guide automatically de-
tects  the screen resolution of the user and based on this information chooses 
to
display the Mobile Guide for a mobile device or the simulation. As the other
CHIP tools the Mobile Museum Guide provides an extensive description of each
artwork and a set of artworks related to it. Visitors can also search for 
speciﬁc
artworks exhibited in the museum and can also give a rating to objects they ﬁnd
interesting or like.

When the user selects a tour to follow the Mobile Guide checks the avail-
ability and the positioning of all the artworks in the tour in the museum. It 
is

⁶ See http://www.chip-project.org/demo

⁷ http://e-culture.multimedian.nl/

⁸ http://www.chip-project.org/demo/mobileguide


possible that the user has created the tour in advance but by the time that he
actually managed to visit the museum some artworks could have been removed
or replaced. Next the user adds artworks to the tour that qualify according to
contextual and user criteria. Similarly the user can remove artworks from the
tour. The user can also specify tour constraints, such as the length of the 
tour in
terms of the maximum number of artworks included in a tour or in terms of the
maximum time to spend in the museum. Based on these constraints, the tour
can adapt dynamically while the user is in the museum. The user can change
those adaptation parameters at any point during the usage of the Mobile Guide
(e.g. before starting a tour, while following a tour). The user can also choose 
an
option of adapting the tour based on his ratings given to artworks while using a
Mobile Guide.

Suppose the user follows a tour of recommended artworks and he has chosen
an option of adapting the tour. If he provides a rating to an artwork that he
sees CHIP demonstrator updates the user model and as consequence the list
of recommended artworks. However, this version of the Mobile Guide does not
take spatial constraints as well as information about already seen artworks into
account. In section 3 we show how SWI-Prolog Space package allows to solve
this problem and in section 4 we present details about the implementation of
the third version of the CHIP Mobile guide including those spatial constrains,
http://www.chip-project.org/spacechip.

3  Finding Routes through the Rijksmuseum

The Art Recommender supplies a list of recommended artworks that are ordered
by the estimated likelihood that the user will ﬁnd them appealing based on
manual ratings. Even though the rooms in the Rijksmuseum have themes, such
as works about the Dutch republic or works by Rembrandt and his pupils, these
themes do not necessarily coincide with the preferences of the user. This means
that even a small set of recommended artworks can be distributed over the entire
museum. In order to improve the user experience of the museum visit, we reorder
the results of the Art Recommender so that there is an eﬃcient way to walk from
one to the other. This route minimizes the walking eﬀort, while maximizing the
number of top recommendations. Also, it takes into account a optional caps to
the walking distance and the number of artworks. This helps the user to decide
where to go given limited time. (The feeling of missing something important can
cause people to linger too long in the “wrong” rooms and therefore to miss their
favorite works.)

An Easy Traveling Salesman Problem. Computing an eﬃcient route through a
museum is very similar to the traveling salesman problem. However, for a few
reasons, theoretically at least, a signiﬁcantly easier problem than the general
traveling salesman problem, for which the greedy nearest-neighbor search algo-
rithm is considered a sub-optimal solution. First, if you consider the artwork
displays, rooms, doors, hallways, and stairs to be nodes in a connectivity 
graph,


then this graph is not fully connected, because there are walls and ﬂoors in the
way. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. Second, the rooms are considered units when
the exhibits are created, which means it makes sense to view all works from a
single room together. This means it is nearly always a good idea to delay 
transi-
tions across doors until all displays in a room have been visited. And third, 
ﬂoor
transitions take a lot of eﬀort, especially up by stairs, or either way by 
elevator,
because you have to wait for the elevator. For these reasons there are only a 
few
sensible paths through the museum. Locations are grouped per room and then
per ﬂoor. If you set the transition weight of the edges in the connectivity 
graph
to the experienced distance instead of the actual distance then nearest neighbor
search will always send the visitor to works within the same room ﬁrst before
making the transition to another room (or even ﬂoor), which is good in the case
of the Rijksmuseum, but which is bad in the case the general traveling salesman
problem, because it causes local optima.


room

door

room

door   hallway

door

display  display


display

display

display   display   display

stairs

door   room

Fig. 1. Example connectivity graph

Implementation of the Nearest Neighbor Router. The SWI-Prolog space package

[8] provides nearest neighbor search. However, this nearest neighbor search is
unaware of the restrictions posed by the walls and ﬂoors. Therefore, we base our
routing on a connectivity graph search algorithm that uses intersection queries
as opposed to nearest neighbor queries. First we compute a connectivity graph
between all the artwork displays, rooms, stairwells, etc. that takes into 
account
where the doors are. Then we compute the weighted shortest path between all
the displays. The weight is based on graph distance, the type of the transition
(e.g. moving to another ﬂoor is more expensive), and on the distance between
locations inside a room (e.g. how far displays are from each other or from a
door). This shortest distance matrix is used to compute an eﬃcient path along
all the recommended artworks. The exact method we use to calculate the routes
is as follows:

– Pre-compute artwork distance matrix once

1. deﬁne that stairs, hallways, toilets, are rooms

2. deﬁne works are at a display in the museum

(a) give the display a x, y, z coordinate

3. deﬁne what it means to be connected

(a) places (displays, doors) space intersect with same room

(b) places are stated to be connected (stairs to stairs on other ﬂoor) by

A chip:connectsTo B


4. assert A chip:connectsTo B for each connected pair A, B

5. make connectivity graph of chip:connectsTo

6. compute weights for each transition

(a) graph distance plus distance within room

(b) door transitions get a higher graph distance than display-display
transitions

(c) stairs transitions get an even higher graph distance

7. compute and cache upper triangle matrix of weighted graph shortest
path distances between all places

– Apply routing algorithm for each request

1. fetch set of recommended works (given by Art Recommender)

2. fetch current position (given by user interface)

3. fetch remaining time in museum (given by user interface)

4. fetch maximum number of artworks to route (given by user interface)

5. greedy nearest neighbor search in weighted distance graph until list of
recommended works is empty:

(a) look up nearest recommended work

(b) remove work from list of candidates

(c) add path from current position to work to recommended route

(d) set current position to location of work

(e) add length of path to total length of recommended route

6. while total path length of recommended route takes longer than remain-
ing time in museum

(a) remove furthest artwork from current position

(b) apply greedy nearest neighbor search again (step 5)

4  SPACE-CHIP Demonstrator

4.1 Usage Scenario

Imagine the following usage scenario: Our user prepares a visit to the Rijksmu-
seum. He provides his opinion about a number of Rijksmuseum artworks and
topics through the Art Recommender e.g. rates the painting “Woman Reading
a Letter” and the artist that made the painting Johannes Vermeer with 4 stars
meaning he likes them. These ratings result in the list of recommended artworks
that form a Tour of Recommended Artworks that the user can view in the Tour
Wizard 9. The user is going to follow this tour inside the museum with the help
of the CHIP Mobile Guide. The routed tour is shown in Fig. 3. We use icons

⁹ For the demonstration purposes we simulate the user’s experience with the 
mobile
device by showing the tour map in the Tour Wizard tool. In diﬀerence with the
original version of the tool in this Tour Wizard we indicate with icons the 
(imaginary)
artworks locations. Semantically enriched data about Rijksmuseum collection only
provides information about the room number where a particular artwork is located
but does not provide information about the exact artwork location.


Fig. 2. Artwork description page

in a diﬀerent color to indicate artworks that are in the tour and connect them
with the tour line. The user location is indicated with an icon at the entrance
door on the ground ﬂoor. During the visit the user views artworks that are in
the tour but is also attracted by other artworks outside his tour. In order to 
give
a notiﬁcation to the system that the user has viewed an artwork he has to click
on a corresponding icon on the museum map and in the popup window showing
artwork description (see Fig. 2) he has to click on “Viewed” icon. If the user
clicks on a “Viewed” icon for an artwork that is in his tour then the tour route
remains the same. Otherwise the tour may be re-routed taking into account the
user’s interest in that artwork. He can also give ratings to any artwork he 
sees.
These actions result in the tour being dynamically adapted taking into account
the history of his visit (seen artworks), changing interests and current 
location.
(However if the user wants to follow the initial sequence of recommended art-
works and does not want the tour to be adapted he can select a corresponding
option in the tour conﬁguration). If the user, for example, likes the works by
Frans Hals and Ferdinand Bol he comes across on his way to the recommended
Johannes Vermeer works, he can add a rating by selecting the work on the map
and submitting a new rating (see Fig. 2). This automatically updates the tour.
The updated tour is shown in Fig. 4. For the sake of clarity we have highlighted
the works from the original tour with red, the new Frans Hals recommendations
with yellow and the new Ferdinand Bol work with blue.


Fig. 3. Initial route of the tour of recommended recommended artworks

Fig. 4. Re-routed tour of recommended artworks


Fig. 5. Mapping CHIP user model (UM) to the simple event model (SEM)

4.2  Mapping the CHIP User Model to SEM

In order to provide data exchange between CHIP and SWI-Prolog Space package
we mapped the original CHIP user model (UM) [9] speciﬁed using RDF/XML
to the Simple Event Model (SEM)10 which is proposed by van Hage et al. [7]
and is just a formalization in RDF using SEM.

:Saskia a sem:Actor ;

sem:participatesIn :event_1, :event_2, :event_3 .

:event_1 a sem:Event ;

sem:eventType :rating ;
chip:rated :artwork_9 ;
chip:ratedValue "0.5" .

:event_2 a sem:Event ;

sem:eventType :viewing ;
sem:partOf :event_3 ;
chip:viewed :artwork_16 .

:event_3 a sem:Event, rdf:Seq ;
sem:eventType :tour ;
rdf:_1 :artwork_16 ;
rdf:_2 :artwork_5 ;
rdf:_3 :artwork_9 .

Fig. 6. Code example of the CHIP User Model based on SEM

¹⁰ For this work we use this version: 
http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/2009/04/event/.
A newer version is available at http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/2009/11/sem/


As shown in Fig. 5, we deﬁned chip:User as a sub class of the sem:Actor,
who participates in the sem:Event. In our case, there are three diﬀerent types
of events: (i) rating, (ii) viewing, and (iii) tour. In a rating event, the 
user rates
a sem:Object with a chip:ratedValue from “-1” to “1”. The viewing events
are usually part of the tour events, since the user views a sem:Object during
the tour. In a tour event, the user adds a sem:Object into a particular tour.
All of the objects added in the tour will be ordered in a sequence based on
their locations in the museum, which are described using the rdf: n¹¹ as a sub
property of the rdfs:member.

Suppose Saskia is a CHIP user who participated in three events: (i) she rated

artwork 9 with a value of “0.5”; (ii) she added three artworks (artwork 5, art-
work 9 and artwork 16) in the tour; and (iii) she viewed artwork 16 in this 
tour.
Using the routing algorithm, artworks are ordered in a sequence: artwork 16,
artwork 5 and then artwork 9. In Fig. 6 we give the corresponding code that
describes these information in the user proﬁle and tour proﬁle.

To indicate the locations of objects in the museum, we use various properties:
chip:inRoom, chip:onFloor, georss:point¹² and georss:polygon. There are
also many diﬀerent types of places in our case, such as display (the place type
for artworks), room, door, hallway, stair, elevator, restroom, etc. Two places 
are
connected by using the chip:connectsTo property.

5  Evaluation

We consider two issues for evaluation: (1) that recommendations are useful for
the users and (2) that sequence of recommendations follows an eﬃcient route
through the museum in a reasonable time that allows real-time interaction with
the system.

With respect to the ﬁrst issue we performed a study Eﬀectiveness of recom-
mendations, novices versus experts. Our conclusion was that the Art Recom-
mender helps novices to elicit or clarify their art preferences from their 
implicit
or unclear knowledge about the museum collection[9]. Compared to the novices,
the experts (mainly museum domian experts) do not seem to beneﬁt from it a
lot, although there is a slight increase of 0.23 (the increase for the novices 
is
1.18) which indicates that the system also helps the experts to elicit their art
preferences.

With respect to the second issue, we measured the speed of the router. To
determine the speed of the router we measured the CPU time taken on a 2.66
GHz Intel processor, given enough memory to store the cached distance matrix
between the artworks. The result is shown in Fig. 7. Even though the perfor-
mance curve shows exponential growth in terms of the number of artworks that
needs to be routed, the total time needed for the routing stays within 
reasonable
bounds for the number of artworks in a realistic tour through the Rijksmuseum.
This performance could be signiﬁcantly improved by further optimizing the data

¹¹ http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/

¹² http://georss.org/simple


4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90

number of artworks to route

Fig. 7. Time performance of the router for n artworks. The router needs exponen-
tial time to derive an eﬃcient route, but stays within a reasonable time for 
real-time
response for the number of artworks that a realistic tour comprises.

structure that stores the distance matrix. At the moment this is a binary tree.
An array matrix would provide faster access. Furthermore, we guarantee that
the router always favors within-room transitions over between-room transitions,
which in turn are always favored over ﬂoor transitions. Given the limited con-
nectivity between the rooms and ﬂoors this guarantees an eﬃcient path.

6  Discussion and Future Work

Existing adaptive mobile museum guides diﬀer in the ways they construct the
user model, the ways they provide personalized experience inside the museums,
devices that they use. Many projects focus on social communication between the
visitors (e.g. friends, group members) while following a tour. Currently, CHIP
does not take social aspect into account–neither for generating recommendations,
nor for communication inside the museum. This could be one of the improve-
ments to the CHIP demonstrator. The strong points of CHIP however are the
distributed user model and the ability to view the CHIP Mobile Guide in any
browser. No additional software installation is required while typically museums
would provide the visitors with the PDA’s running pre-installed software and ask
them to provide some personal information to start creating their user models.
In the presence of Wiﬁ inside the Rijksmuseum the visitor could use his own
device (iPod touch or iPhone) to follow the CHIP Mobile Guide that uses the
user model and the tours information stored on the CHIP server.

We consider several directions for future work.

First, implementing the demonstrator for the use in the realistic situation (in-
side the museum) with the real time data. In the current prototype we simulated
the user’s experience with the mobile device by showing the tour map in the Tour
Wizard tool. To indicate the fact that the user has seen an artwork he has to 
ﬁrst


click on a corresponding icon on the map and then on a “Viewed” icon in the
popup window that opens. Time issues while following the tour in this way are
not taken into account. The next step in developing the demonstrator would be
the implementation of the real-time user localization and re-routing the user by
taking into account the time that he spends viewing artworks, moving between
artworks, taking stairs, etc.

Second, designing and evaluating the user interface for guiding the user in the
realistic situation. At the moment the user is only provided with the museum
map that indicates the tour route and the current user location. Based on the
map the user has to ﬁgure out where to go next. It would be interesting to
consider the possibility of guiding the user “locally” by an indication about
where to go next from the current point, like turn left/right, etc. It would be
also interesting to consider using technologies like Google Goggles13 to show
information about an artwork when the user points with his device on it.

And third, experimenting with various re-routing algorithms. Current algo-
rithm can provide re-routing of a tour or sequencing of a given set of artworks
from the tour (generated by CHIP Art Recommender and Tour Wizard tools)
based on user’s position or closeness to a certain artwork from the tour. In 
addi-
tion to this artworks set, the routing mechanism uses the museum coordinates.
It does not take into account the information from the user model. It would be
interesting however to consider more complex algorithms that would also take
user preferences into account and possibly decide to add more artworks to the
tour that might be interesting for the user based on the user closeness to 
them.

Acknowledgments. The work on the CHIP project is funded by the Dutch Sci-
ence Foundation CATCH program and is in collaboration with the Rijksmuseum
Amsterdam. Part of this work has been carried out as a part of the Poseidon
project  in collaboration with Thales Nederland, under the responsibilities of 
the
Embedded Systems Institute (ESI). This project is partially supported by the
Dutch Ministry of Economic Aﬀairs under the BSIK program.

References

1. Aoki, P.M., Grinter, R.E., Hurst, A., Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D., 
Woodruﬀ,
A.: Sottovoce: exploring the interplay of conversation and mobile audio spaces. 
In:
SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in computing systems (2002)

2. Kruger, A., Jorg, B., Heckmann, D., Kruppa, M., Wasinger, R.: Adaptive Mobile
Guides. In: Brusilovsky, P., Kobsa, A., Nejdl, W. (eds.) Adaptive Web 2007. 
LNCS,
vol. 4321, pp. 521–549. Springer, Heidelberg (2007)

3. Oppermann, R., Specht, M.: A nomadic information system for adaptive 
exhibition
guidance. In: ICHIM99 Conference (1999)

4. Rocchi, C., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Kruppa, M., Kruger, A.: The museum 
visit:
generating seamless personalized presentations on multiple devices. In: 9th 
Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (2004)

¹³ http://www.google.com/mobile/goggles/


5. Roes, I., Stash, N., Wang, Y., Aroyo, L.: A personalized walk through the 
museum:
The CHIP interactive tour guide. In: ACM CHI-Student Research Competition
(2009)

6. Sumi, Y., Mase, K.: Interface Agents that facilitate knowledge interactions 
between
community members. In: Cognitive Technologies Series, pp. 405–427. Springer,
Heidelberg (2004)

7. van Hage, W.R., Malais´e, V., de Vries, G., Schreiber, G., van Someren, M.: 
Com-
bining ship tra jectories and semantics with the simple event model (sem). In:
1st ACM International Workshop on Events in Multimedia. Sheridan Publishers
(2009)

8. van Hage, W.R., Wielemaker, J., Schreiber, G.: The space package: Tight 
inte-
gration of space and semantics. In: 8th International Semantic Web Conference
Workshop: TerraCognita (2009)

9. Wang, Y., Stash, N., Aroyo, L., Gorgels, P., Rutledge, L., Schreiber, G.: 
Recom-
mendations based on semantically enriched museum collections. Journal of Web
Semantics 6(4), 43–58 (2008)

10. Luyten, K., Van Loon, H., Teunkens, D., Gabri¨els, K., Coninx, K., 
Manshoven,
E.: ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide. In: 7th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage
VAST (2006)

11. Chou, S.-C., Hsieh, W.-T., Gandon, F.L., Sadeh, N.M.: Semantic Web Technolo-
gies for Context-Aware Museum Tour Guide Applications. In: 19th International
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications, pp. 709–714.
IEEE Computer Society, Washington (2005)

