Archives and Museum Informatics 13: 127–138, 1999.

© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

127

A Nomadic Information System for Adaptive
Exhibition Guidance

REINHARD OPPERMANN and MARCUS SPECHT

German National Research Center for Information Technology, Institute for 
Applied Information
Technology, Germany

Abstract. The paper describes the electronic guide HIPS that can be used during 
the process of a
visit in a museum, i.e., for preparation, execution and evaluation. Users can 
access the system via the
Web to prepare a visit by receiving information about the content and 
organization of an exhibition
and practical issues like location and opening hours. The visitor can also 
prepare a tour for the actual
visit or define hotspots with important exhibits. The system should remind the 
user when on site.
Once the user is in the museum he or she has two specific options to use the 
system: the visitor
can walk around in the museum and remain standing where he or she finds an item 
of interest.
The current location in the room identified by infrared emitters at all 
exhibits triggers an indicator
for the information presentation. Or, the visitor can select a tour prepared by 
a curator, prepared
by the user in advance (at home) or generated by the user ad hoc. In the 
museum, the information
access is provided via wireless technologies. This allows the user to access 
information by moving
in the physical space and navigating in the information space concurrently. The 
Web-based server
approach allows for adaptive information selection and presentation based on a 
user model evaluating
the history of the usage of the system. The user can accelerate the adaptation 
by specifying interests
and preferences in the user model. Before the visit the user can define tours 
and hotspots and enter
annotations that will be presented or activated by the system in the 
appropriate physical environment.
After a visit in the museum the user can evaluate the experience at home for 
further own inquiries or
for communication with other interested people. The 
before-during-after-the-visit-support of visitors
via nomadic information system has been designed based on evidence from our 
questionnaire pre-
study, which showed that visitors actually use information available in or 
about museums before and
also after a visit.

Key words: adaptive information selection, location awareness, nomadic 
information system

Introduction

This paper describes the goal and practice of the nomadic guide Hippie¹ that can
be used during the process of a visit in a museum, i.e., for the preparation, 
the
visit itself and its evaluation. An information system is said to be nomadic 
when
the user has access to his or her personal information space from all places 
inde-

1 The prototype Hippie was developed by GMD within the project Hyperinteraction 
within Phys-
ical spaces (HIPS), an EU-supported LTR project in ESPRIT I.3 The partners of 
the consortium
are University of Siena (co-ordinating partner), University of Edinburgh, 
University College Dublin,

ITC, SINTEF and GMD, CB&J, and Alcatel.


pendent of specific devices. To understand cultural heritage both are necessary,
information about the background or the context of an event or exhibition as a
whole, and information about the details of single units (exhibits) and the 
expe-
rience of the authentic environment. The first aspect, the holistic view, can 
most
probably best be studied before and after the visit. The details can probably 
best
be studied in front of an exhibition combining authentic sensory perception with
additional information provided by a complementary medium. The main purpose
of  the electronic guide presented in this paper is to support the actual visit 
to a
museum, i.e., to enrich the understanding and enjoyment of exhibits, not to 
replace
a real visit by a virtual visit. The electronic guide provides information 
access
at home via normal Internet connection for the preparation and evaluation of a
visit. Inside the museum information access is provided via wireless 
technologies.
The latter allows the user to access information by moving in the physical space
and navigating in the information space concurrently. A Web-based client-server
approach allows for adaptive selection and presentation of information based on 
a
user model evaluating the history of the usage of HIPS with respect to 
knowledge,
interests and preferences. The user can accelerate and modify the adaptation by
specifying interests and preferences in the user model.

Information for Visitors of Cultural Exhibitions

Even if information giving is not a museum’s only goal the information profits
of museum visitors is often modest. People are restricted in their information
selection and perception not only by their individual time but also by available
information and presentation media. For visitor studies in museums see Bourdieu,
Darbel and Schnapper (1991), Hooper-Greenhill (1995). In a questionnaire study
in 6 art museums in Europe with 561 visitors involved we found a preference of
people to obtain and use more information media then currently available on 
site.
About 10% of the visitors preferred to more information than currently 
available.

Not only information during a visit but also information about the museum
exhibition before and after a visit is appreciated by the visitors. More than 
two
third of the respondents report that “sometimes”, “often” or “always” they use
information media before they visit a museum; almost two thirds reported the 
same
for after the visit.

Even if the absolute numbers of these results are possibly biased due to social
desirability of the answers, the tendency shows that visitors want to know what
they can see in a museum to make up their minds, for an actual visit decision 
and
to prepare or evaluate a visit.

The numbers show that people like more information about artworks in museum
environments. This is remarkable considering that people are socialized in their
information behavior by the few information resources available in and about
culture and art exhibitions. The results do not show the potential for new 
products
and services; 10% of visitors liking more information is not overwhelming. 
People


Table I. Information media in museums.

Media          Media used during  Media preferred
the current visit   for a normal visit

Maps, navigation, signs    28%        46%

Catalogue, guidebook     30%        40%

Tourist guide         11%        24%

Leaflets            9%        14%

Audio guide          4%        15%

Information desk        6%        13%

Comments of friends     20%        17%

Going autonomously     40%        34%
(without information media)

extrapolate their experience from temporary offers. The real potential can best 
be
tested by prototypes and pre-products in a mid-term period of time when new ways
of information and communication media are offered and used and new styles of
behavior are established.

Currently, visitors to environments to cultural relevance, i.e., an event, a
building, an artwork, typically read information labels attached to the 
exhibits,
leaflets available in individual rooms or brochures offered at the information 
desk.
Visitors also listen to guides, both human guides and recently more and more 
audio
guides, or they use kiosk systems. More extensive material like a textbook or a
catalogue is bought only by a small subset of visitors. Such books are more 
suitable
to be used (or simply to be exposed in a showcase) at home. Reading a textbook
or viewing a book of plates can be seen as a virtual visit of a cultural 
environ-
ment. The media can explain exhibits or events by pictorial reproductions, 
texts or
videos. A virtual visit allows for reading more detailed information about the 
given
exhibition or more exhaustive explanations of a collection of exhibits. Studying
explanations of cultural heritage away from the real place does not provide 
access
to the atmosphere of the environment and cannot support the understanding of the
context or the real life experience of an exhibition.

Both real and virtual visits have their pros and cons. A real visit is time 
limited,
the place is sometimes crowded, hot or cold, not stimulating for extensive 
reading
and discussing. On the other hand, a real visit gives an authentic impression 
of the
exhibition, the atmosphere and the context.

A virtual visit provides less chance to immerse into the environment of the
exhibits; motivation and concentration may be less intensive. It can, on the 
other
hand, be organized for the best suitable time and location, supported by 
explanatory
information including texts, pictures, sound and video, and it can be repeated 
and


Table II. Information before and after a museum visit.

Information used  Never  Seldom  Sometimes  Often  Always

Before a visit    6%   19%   35%     31%  10%

After a visit    8%   26%   38%     19%   2%

combined with other exhibitions or exhibits displayed at different places all 
over
the world.

The benefits of both a real visit and a virtual visit can be combined with new
media that augment the real experience with additional information supporting a
richer understanding and enjoyment of cultural heritage. Two aspects are 
important
for a combination, first, the interconnection of the authentic environment with 
more
extensive and flexible information access and second, the continuous support of
the process of reception by the same media from the preparation of a visit to 
the
evaluation and communication of results.

Information System for a Continuous Visiting Process

Hippie, as an internet-based guide, offers added value to current information 
facil-
ities by supporting all along the process of the perception of cultural 
heritage. The
process supporting information is made possible by the nomadic characteristic of
the system that allows the user to have access to his or her personal 
information
space from all places independently from specific devices (for nomadic systems 
in
general see Kleinrock, 1997). The information selected and presented to the 
visitor
reflects the location (at home or in front of an exhibit), the interests, the 
know-
ledge and the presentation preferences of the user. Dynamic elements for 
animated
interpretation and auditive modality complement the visual modality preoccupied
by    the physical environment. The user is equipped with a handheld computer 
and
a headphone to listen to explanations of the current object and environment; to
immerse into the subject of interest. The user is left alone with the physical 
envir-
onment and the complementary explanations; via the communication function of
the system he or she can also get in touch with other individuals present in 
the real
or virtual exhibition for appointments or for communicating suggestions.

In the following we describe the main features of the system to explain the
benefit for the users: the process support by permanent system accessibility, 
the
location awareness of the system to present information suitable to the current
position of the visitor, multimodal information presentation to exploit the 
range
of human perception, and the information adaptation to the user’s knowledge and
interests. Additionally some features are described that increase the practical 
value
of the system.


INTERNET CONNECTIVITY FOR CONTINUOUS INFORMATION WITH DIFFERENT
DEVICES

Internet connectivity provides access to the information basis from all over the
world. At home the user can access the system with a desktop computer with
high resolution representations to study the site of interest, e.g., a content 
list and
pictures of an exhibition, descriptions of individual artworks and artists as 
well
as practical information about opening hours, ticket prices etc., and to 
prepare an
actual visit. The visit in the exhibition is supported by a handheld computer 
(PDA)
with wireless LAN connection.² Access points provide the network connection
within the museum. Being in the museum the user can receive the same information
space he or she is already familiar with from sessions at home. The same 
richness
of information is available even the visitor will not see a high resolution 
represen-
tation. On a small screen only a thumbnail icon will be presented to reassure 
the
visitor that the information that is presented is about the artwork he or she 
is in front
of. The device does not follow the user but the information access is 
ubiquitous.

LOCATION AWARENESS

The user of the nomadic system is free to move around in the physical space.
The system identifies the current position of the user in two ways. It knows 
about
the type of computer and the environment the user is connected to. At home a
big computer with high resolution and high bandwidth is used. In the museum a
small computer with a small screen and lower bandwidth requires an adaptation
of information presentation: less explicit interaction, more implicit 
interaction by
navigation in the physical space, more audio presentation than text, less 
detailed
graphical presentations and more thumbnail-sketches.

The second type of location awareness means the current coordinates of the
visitor within the museum. By infrared infrastructure the position and by an 
elec-
tronic compass the direction of the visitor is identified and transmitted from 
the
handheld computer to the server so that the server can automatically send the
appropriate information for the visitor about the current exhibit. The infrared 
infra-
structure consists of emitters being installed on the walls underneath each 
exhibit.
The emitters send an ID to a receiver fastened to the jacket of the visitor or 
attached
to the user’s headphones and connected to the handheld computer. Additional
emitters are installed above each door of the museum allowing the identification
of the visitor passing the entrance of a room before entering into the cone of 
an
exhibit emitter. By this means a continuous localization of the visitor can be 
used
for the information selection and be displayed on a map of the museum if the

2 Currently no PDA is available with a PCMCIA slot for the wireless and for 
infrared receiver
(see next paragraph). Therefore at present we use a Toshiba Libretto 100 CT. 
Suitable PDAs are
announced for the near future.


Figure 1. Notification of a new exhibit next to the wandering visitor.

visitor requires support for navigation in the physical space, e.g., to find an 
exhibit
of interest.

If a new item of potential interest is detected by the infrared component the
system presents an “earcon” combined with a blinking “News” icon on the screen
that can be clicked by the user. Then the system displays one or more names and
thumbnail presentations of the current exhibits;³ with a follow up hyperlink the
user can start the presentation. A sequence of the “News” notification, the 
display
of close paintings to be selected and the interesting presentation of the third 
option
“Armour and Merkur” is shown in Figure 1.

3 In case of small exhibits or exhibits one above the other an infrared emitter 
is connected to
several exhibits so that having clicked the “News” button the user receives a 
list of items.


Figure 2. Form discription by graphical teaching lines with written and spoke 
text.

MULTIMODAL INFORMATION PRESENTATION

The information presentation for visitors during the preparation and evaluation
phases is unimodal containing pictures and text. This type of presentation 
reflects
the typical interaction and perception style of a user at a desktop and enables 
easy
reading and printing including scanning and browsing the information space. The
information presentation during the visit is multimodal containing written text 
on
the screen and spoken language via headphones and multicodal including text,
graphics and animations. The visitor’s visual attention is free for the physical
environment, especially for the exhibits. Most information is presented without
requiring a look of the visitor on the screen. The audio information to be 
presented
is currently composed by snippets of canned texts spoken by a human being. Later
also computer-generated language can be used, once it is of sufficient quality. 
At
present generated language can at mostly be used for direction giving 
information:
“Turn left”, “In front of you ... ”. At present 819 audio objects are included 
in
the system. For the paintings between 160 and 300 sec of presentations of 7 to 
25
attributes are offered with an average time of 207 sec. For all artworks, 
including
sculptures and art crafts, an average time of 90 sec is offered.

There are some cases when a look of the visitor on the screen is necessary. The
first is the navigation support that goes beyond a simple direction giving 
hint, e.g.,
go right, turn left and the like. An orientation in the physical space and the 
location
of oneself and of exhibitions of interes may require a graphical map with 
identifiers


for the visitor and for the exhibitions. The second case where visitors may need
screen displays are visual aids to understand an artwork, e.g., the composition,
the form design or the color design. The electronic guide provides explanations
of such features of artworks not only by textual descriptions but also by 
graphical
illustrations and videos. Figure 2 shows an example of a graphical form 
explanation
and explaining text displayed right to the graphical illustration (the text is 
also
presented auditively via headphones).

INFORMATION ADAPTATION TO USER’S KNOWLEDGE AND INTERESTS

As described above the information selection and presentation is adapted to the
currently used device, to the network connection, and to the location of the 
user.
Now we will describe the adaptation of the information selection and presenta-
tion to the individual user (for user adaptation see Kobsa, Nill and Fink, 1997;
Oppermann, 1994). The user can be more or less competent of and interested in
the domain in question. The adaptive component runs a user model describing the
knowledge and the interests of the user. The user model automatically evaluates 
the
user’s interaction with the system in the information space and the user’s 
navigation
in the museum, i.e., in the physical space. Externally acquired knowledge is not
accessible to the system; interests can only be evaluated based on the 
interaction
of the user with the system; alternatively the system allows the user to specify
prominent interests in a user profile dialogue.

If the user has used the system to select information about an exhibition, an
artist, an artwork, particular attributes of an artwork and so on, the system 
updates
the user model for seen entities and seen topics. For the following 
presentations it
can adapt the information to the user’s assumed pre-knowledge and interests. The
adaptation to the assumed pre- knowledge is performed by avoiding redundancy
(see also Not et al., 1997). A painting that has already been seen by the user 
and
explained to him or her by its name, author, dateline and style will only be 
reassured
by its name when the user selects it a second time; more information are 
offered of
course for explicit requests of the user.

The adaptation to the assumed interests of the user is provided by adaptive 
tips.
If a user selects a number of exhibits the user model identifies common attrib-
utes of the selection in terms of, e.g., artist, style or genre. In case of 
exceeding
a rule-defined threshold the system initiates a “Tip” displayed by a three times
blinking light on the screen that can be clicked by the user. The system 
presents
an observation as a list of objects the user has selected, e.g., paintings from 
the
genre “mythology”, and a recommendation of a tour the user can start encom-
passing other paintings of the genre “mythology” to be seen in the museum. Two
screenshots with a blinking light notifying the user of available tour proposals
and   a cumulation of three tours with the system’s observations and inferred 
tour
proposals are shown in Figure 3.


Figure 3. Notification of an adaptive tour proposal.

The same rule-based mechanism is applied for the presentation of attributes
of the artworks. If the user selects a set of particular interesting attributes 
for the
user the system recommends to present the set of attributes as a default 
sequence of
topics for the given class of artworks. The user who is more interested in the 
history
and social background gets a sequence of topics like biography and period, the 
user
who is more interested in art analytical topics gets a sequence of composition 
and
form and color design.

By adaptations of the information selection and presentation the benefit of a
visit for the user is expected to be higher, especially the knowledge and under-
standing of the exhibition in general and the exhibits in particular but also 
the
richness of experience can be intensified by personalised information.

ANNOTATION, EXPLANATION AND COMMUNICATION

Hippie provides additional features to support the individual user and a user 
group.
For the process of a visit at different times and places it is helpful for the 
user
to make notes attached to exhibitions or to individual artworks in order to 
store


personal explanations or bookmarks available during a visit. An annotation 
button
“notes” attached to the presentation of the exhibits supports this goal.

The “contact” function of the system allows the user to communicate with other
users. The communication can be directed to a dedicated addressee (a partner, a
family, a group). A list of currently present users is offered as well as the 
possib-
ility to enter a full e-mail address to contact a remote user. Recommendations 
can
be exchanged while moving independently through the physical space or simply
appointments can be made to meet in the cafeteria in half an hour. Messages can
also   be directed to the public as a contribution to a growing knowledge base 
about
the environment.

For definitions of terms and descriptions of names a “glossary” is available 
that
can be addressed as a function via the main menu and in the context of content
description on the fly via hyperlinks.

By the combination of features described above Hippie makes use of Weiser’s
vision, called calm technology by ubiquitous computing (Weiser, 1991). The 
equip-
ment used in the museum and the information and communication interface is
designed to let the visitor walk in the physical space of the museum getting 
access
to  a contextualised information space tailored to the individual needs and the
current environment. Contextualised information presentation takes into account
more than just the user’s location (for contextualisation see Schmidt, Beigl and
Gellersen, 1998; Brézillon, 1998; Abowd et al., 1997). A contextualised informa-
tion space is defined by an information repository adapted to the location, the 
user
and the task. In the case of a museum visit as an instance of self defined 
activities
the task can be replaced by the visitors interest.

Evaluation

The added value of the system compared with current information media has
got positive feedback from experts from computer science and cultural heritage
domain (museum curators, art educators). During the development of the system
formative evaluations have been conducted with human factor experts and an art
educator. The input has been used to improve the content and the user interface
of  the system. The current issue of evaluation is the dynamic of the 
meta-dialogue
between the system and the user for the location aware presentation and for 
adap-
tation proposals. There is a goal conflict between the full control of the 
dialogue
to the user and a short and easy confirmation of system initiated proposals. In 
case
of the location aware presentation of a new item of potential interest a sound 
icon
(earcon) is presented combined with a blinking “News” icon on the screen that 
can
be clicked by the user. The system presents the exhibit the user is in front of 
and the
user can start the presentation. Sound (earcon), blinking “News” icon, and 
exhibits
are presented and have to be perceived and controlled by the user. In case of 
the
adaptive tour proposal a blinking “Tip” icon, observation(s) of seen objects and
proposal(s) of suggested tour(s) have to be perceived and controlled by the 
user. At


least for the mobile scenario we are looking for simpler ways of a meta-dialogue
that reduces the dialogue steps but keeps the user in control.

Summative evaluations of the system have been performed with domain experts,
i.e., artists, art educators, and museum curators during a one-day demonstration
and feedback workshop. The experts confirmed the added value of the nomadic
information system both for the process support of preparing, conducting, and
evaluating a museum visit and for the understanding of the artworks with respect
to  the wide spectrum of information provided by the system. The participants
pointed out that the user-system interaction of a mobile guide has to be 
designed
for specific requirements of the exhibition domain. On the one hand, for 
technical
exhibitions a mix of automatic offers and active requests of information might 
have
a stimulating effect. On the other hand, in art exhibitions, perceiving art 
might be
limited by a conflict between promenading an exhibition and searching informa-
tion. The permanent offer of structured information might obstruct the visitor 
to
get involved in a silent conversation with an artwork and to develop an 
individual
understanding. Providing personalised views and individual tours was appreci-
ated. Especially personalised information for visitor interests and knowledge 
was
considered important. Adaptive information selection reduces redundancy and
information overload. The overall feedback was very positive expecting that new
media guides increase the attraction of museums.

Evaluations with real users are planned. Results with ecological validity can
only be gained in mid term experiments where users have the opportunity to
develop new habits of information behavior with enriched but easy to use inform-
ation media. Individual cases of visitors supported by the electronic guide 
showed
that users with extensive interest and pre-knowledge in art immersed into the
perception of the exhibits on the wall and the information presented by the 
system;
they exploited the richness of the information space both quantitatively with a
average presentation time of 2.5 min. per exhibit and qualitatively with audio
and text presentation and additional graphical support for the art analytical 
under-
standing of aspects like composition, form or color design. Visitors with only
curiosity and low pre-knowledge used the system for short snippets of informa-
tion while wandering through the exhibition. Whether the average visitor can be
stimulated to perceive a more intensive presentation and develop a more 
extensive
understanding of artworks will be investigated in mid or long term studies.

References

Abowd, G.D., Dey, A.K., Abowd, G., Orr, R. and Brotherton, J. 
“Context-awareness in Wear-
able and Ubiquitous Computing”, 1st International Symposium on Wearable 
Computers, 1997.
Proceedings of ISWC’97, October 13–14, 1997.

Bourdieu, P., Darbel, A. and Schnapper, D. The Love of Art: European Art 
Museums and Their Public

(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1991).

Brézillon, P. “Introduction to the Special Issue ‘Using Context in 
Applications’ ”, International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 48 (1998): 303–305.


Hooper-Greenhill, E. Museum, Media, Message (London/New York: Routledge, 1995).

Kleinrock, L. “Nomadicity: Anytime, Anywhere” in A Disconnected World, Invited 
paper, Mobile
Networks and Applications 1(4) (1997): 351–357.

Lave, J. and Wenger, E. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation 
(Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1991).

Kobsa, A., Nill, A. and Fink, J. “Hypertext and Hypermedia Clients of the User 
Modeling System
BGP-MS”, in M. Maybury (ed.), Intelligent Multimedia Information Retrieval 
(Boston, MA:
MIT Press, 1997), pp. 339–356.

Not, E., Petrelli, D., Stock, O. and Zancanaro, M. “Person-Oriented Guided 
Visits in a Physical
Museum”, in David Bearman and Jennifer Trant (eds.), Proceedings of the Museum 
Interactive
Multimedia 1997: Cultural Heritage Systems. Design and Interfaces (Paris: 
September 3–5,
1997), pp. 69–79.

Oppermann, R. (ed.). Adaptive User Support (Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, 1994).

Schmidt A, Beigl, M. and Gellersen, H.W. “There is More to Context than 
Location”, Proceedings
of the MC-98. Interactive Applications of Mobile Computing (Rostock: November 
24–25, 1998).

Suchman, L.A. Plans and Situated Actions (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, UK, 1987).
Weiser, M. “The Computer for the 21st Century”, Scientific American 265(3) 
(1991), 94–104.

