Accelerating the world's research.

Adaptive Support for a Mobile
Museum Guide

marcus specht


Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of the best related papers 

Adaptive Information for Nomadic Activities. A process oriented approach
Marcus Specht

Adaptive mobile museum guide for information and learning on demand
Marcus Specht

i3 Annual Conference COVER SHEET for Submissions
Marcus Specht


Adaptive Support for a Mobile Museum Guide

Reinhard Oppermann and Marcus Specht

GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology
Institute for Applied Information Technology (FIT-MMK)

D-53754 Sankt Augustin

email: {marcus.specht, reinhard.oppermann}@gmd.de


Keywords:

Nomadic Activities, Mobile Computing, Contextu-
alisation, Adaptive System, Museum Information
System

Abstract:

The paper aims at supporting human activities with
mobile information technology. Supporting activi-
ties over time, space and different social settings
requires information technology to give seamless
network access in different environments and to
model the user’s implicit and explicit interaction
history to adapt to the current situation. As a pro
totype for a system meeting these requirements a
mobile museum guide is introduced.

1 Introduction

The paper describes a mobile information sys-
tem under development in the HIPS¹ project that
supports nomadic activities adapted to the individ-
ual visitor of a museum. Nomadic activities are a
widespread class of human activities. In contrast to
print media till now electronic information and
communication media did not support nomadic ac-
tivities.  The worldwide Web, wired and wireless
connectivity to networks, and small mobile devices
now allow for supporting nomadic activities by in-
formation and communication technology to an
extensive degree. The paper describes support for
art excursions as an attractive class of nomadic ac-
tivities. For the fit of user’s interests and needs ad-
aptation facilities are described. These adaptations
reflect the current user’s local environment (con-
textualisation) and interaction history (individuali-
sation).

¹  The project Hyperinteraction within Physical spaces
(HIPS) is an EU-supported LTR project in ESPRIT
I3. The partners of the consortium are University of
Siena (co-ordinating partner), University of Edin-
burgh, University College Dublin, ITC, SINTEF and
GMD, CB&J, and Alcatel.

A challenging feature of current IT development
is mobile information technology [1]. Mobile in-
formation technology may be a chance to support
ongoing activities from the beginning to the end.

Traditional media like files, literature, memo-books
are limited in their availability. On tour, for exam-
ple, the user can only read those office files or pri-
vate books that he or she has put into the suitcase
before leaving for a journey. Many activities are
distributed over time, over space and between ac-
tors. Nomadic media allow for accessing informa-
tion that are needed in any period of the activity at
any place and together with any partner involved.
The actor is not released to plan his/her activity but
he or she is not required to plan the access to all in-
formation and all co-actors needed in several
phases beforehand.

Another challenging feature of current research
is the adaptation of the selection and presentation of
information according to the user needs [2] [3]. The
user uses different devices with specific character-
istics and restrictions both for information access
(bandwidth) and information presentation (size and
resolution). For mobile information technology the
particular challenge for adaptivity is the support of
users at different locations of the user’s interaction
with the system. Accordingly, nomadic adaptive
systems require both a user model where the infor-
mation according to user needs, knowledge, and
preferences is evaluated and a usage model where
the information about the user’s environment and
client hardware and software is held up-to-date. To
achieve this, mobile information technology can be
combined with technologies to identify the users’
working environment and his or her position in the
physical space [4]. Infrared or General Positioning
System (GPS) allow for contextualising the device
of the user. The position and the movement in the
physical space can be observed and evaluated for
required information [5]. The navigation in the
physical and the navigation in the information
space are used as indicators for the user’s interests,
preferences, and the knowledge acquired so far.

In this paper we want to illustrate the applica-
tion of a mobile adaptive information system for art



excursions including the preparation, the execution,
and the evaluation of a museum visit.

2 Activity processes distributed in time,
space and social setting

Most human activities are not fixed to a par-
ticular point in time and space. Many activities
evolve and by their nature they are distributed in
time and space. They may be executed at different
places and the execution may be interrupted by
other activities. Activities often involve several
people. Activities are planned by and for several in-
dividuals or groups. They are more than individual
short term acts at one place. Extension of activities
can thus be described in three dimensions: exten-
sion in time, extension in space, and extension in
communities. For analytical reasons the process of
activities can be divided into phases like prepara-
tion, execution and evaluation. New technologies
allow for a more comprehensive support of activi-
ties no matter where, when and by whom each (part
of an) activity is accomplished. For an information
and communication system to support human ac-
tivities it is central to consider an integration of the
requirements of the described features. For an ap-
propriate support it is not enough to provide any in-
formation at any places in any time for anybody.

The specific tasks and goals of an individual and
his or her communicators, co-operators or com-
petitors at specific points of time and space have to
be taken into account. The adaptation has to con-
sider the demands from the phase of the activity.

3 Adaptivity for navigation in the physical
space

Mobile adaptive information systems should
support human activities considering time, location
and social constellation in the physical space and
the user’s navigation in the information space. No-
madic activities–by its definition–take place at dif-
ferent places. Different devices support access to
information technology at different places. In the
office  the user typically uses a well-equipped mul-
timedia PC. At home the user has possibly low
connection to the Internet via modem. During a
journey  the user is equipped with a laptop or a
palmtop with low connectivity and display size.

The system can be adapted to the specific condi-
tions of the given place. It can prepare the connec-
tion to the Internet, adapt the composition of tex-
tual, graphical and video elements and adjust the
presentation to the environmental conditions.

Activities at different places allow for different
interaction with an information system. In the office
or   at home the information system is the central fo-
cus of the user’s attention. He or she is sitting in

front of the system, selecting, reading and writing
information presented on the screen. Outdoor the
user interacts with objects within a physical space
and the attention is directed towards the physical
and social environment. The presentation of infor-
mation by an information system should reflect the
absorbed (mostly visual) sense of the user. Instead
of visually displaying information audio output via
headphones may be more suitable for a user while
additional visual cues may be designed to comple-
ment the understanding of or the navigation through
the audio information.

Audio presentations allow for viewing the
physical environment supported synchronously by
complementary information. Different modalities of
perception have advantages and disadvantages for
the recipient. Audio presentation is weak in pro-
viding control for the user. Control only allows for
start, pause, move back or forward, and stop. Se-
lection of parts of information and information
about the kind and the length of the information are
not supported. Compared to visual information
audio output has to be received by the user sequen-
tially.

4 Adaptivity for navigation in the informa-
tion space

For the selection and presentation of informa-
tion during nomadic activities additional indicators
for the user’s needs can be obtained from the con-
text of use during the nomadic activity. Preparing
an activity needs information different from the
execution of the activity and the evaluation of an
excursion needs yet another set of information or
editing demands of information. During the execu-
tion of an activity the physical environment pro-
vides objects the user can refer to. During the
preparation or evaluation phase of the activity the
physical objects probably need to be visualised by a
graphical representation. Following the user’s ac-
tivity process the user model of the system can
evaluate the history of navigation both in the physi-
cal space and in the information space. The model
can describe the information used by the user and
the places visited by the user.

The adaptation of the selection and presentation
of the information to the user supports the combi-
nation of new and familiar information for the user.
For information behaviour in general and for
learning behaviour in particular it is preferable in
terms of effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction
for the person to learn new elements embedded into
a familiar frame. The connection between already
learned and still to be learned elements is essential
for the learning success. Repetition is a reinforcing
factor for learning. Combining new and familiar



items can augment not only learning results. Also
the enjoyment of attraction environments can be in-
creased when the person gets new aspects of an al-
ready known topic.The navigation of the user in the
physical space is performed by movements of the
user with his or her feet. The information selection
and presentation follows this movement. The user
can also move with his or her hands, navigating in
the information space. Both kinds of control have to
be combined and to be communicated to the user to
avoid confusion or to limit information access.

5 Information system for art excursions: A
scenario

A visitor is assumed to prepare the excursion to
a museum at home by consulting the system via
internet reading descriptions and recommendations,
viewing representations of paintings and so on. The
user’s information selection is the initial basis for
the user model developed for the adaptive behav-
iour of the system. On site the visitor enters the mu-
seum and gets a mobile device connected by wire-
less LAN to a server and location aware by infrared
emitters at the exhibits. The user can select an indi-
vidual guided tour by the system based on an infer-
ence of interest and knowledge developed by the
user model. The visitor can also walk through the
exhibition following own ideas while the system
supports the exploration by contextualised (adapted
to the current position) and individualised (adapted
to the interest and knowledge) descriptions and
comments. Before, during, and after the visit in a
museum the user can enter and exchange own
notes, comments, and communications about his or
her impressions for own or others’ benefit. The
evaluation of the selected objects and the selected
information about the objects allow the system to
update  the user model continuously.

The art domain is attractive for mobile informa-
tion technology first because art excursions require
nomadic activities from visitors. Second, art can
best  be enjoyed when the art recipient can combine
the impression of an art exhibition or an art event
with meta-information synchronically explaining
aspects of the art not being presented by the art-
work itself.

During the journey the system should offer
seamless access to the previously collected infor-
mation, for example, on a palmtop via a wireless
local network. The presentation can take into ac-
count the already provided information and the cur-
rent position of the user identified by infrared (in-
door) or GPS (outdoors). In front of an artwork a
high-resolution representation of the work is dis-
pensable.   If at all the user needs a silhouette of a

painting and opportunities to address areas of the
painting he or she wants to ask questions about.

For a system that users can use at several places
the input and output of the system have to support
immersive interaction. The user can concentrate on
his  or her activity in the physical and social space
and is supported by an additional information layer
of a virtual space with complementary information.
For the viewer of a painting, for example, several
options of verbal comments about the artist, the art
period, the art style, the art technique etc., are pro-
vided to increase the intellectual benefit of the
viewer without reducing his or her visual gusto.

Roughly on site, in more detail before or after the
visit the user can explore the painting style by
overlaying the painting with typical outlines spe-
cific  for the given or for a contrastive style. Virtual
copies of a painting allow for exploring and ma-
nipulating its composition and presentation charac-
teristics including explanatory support by remote
experts via the net to increase the benefit of the
viewer.

The ideas described in this abstract will be im-
plemented and evaluated empirically (A prototype
has been prepared for a “castle day” of GMD at the
end of September 1998.) Massive prototyping in
the consortium will allow to follow different ap-
proaches in the design of the system and to evaluate
the alternatives at different levels.

6 References:

[1] L. Kleinrock: Nomadicity: Anytime, Anywhere
In: A Disconnected World, Invited paper, Mo-
bile Networks and Applications, Vol. 1, No. 4,
January 1997, pp. 351-357.

[2] A. Kobsa, A. Nill, J. Fink: Hypertext and Hy-
permedia Clients of the User Modeling System
BGP-MS. In: M. Maybury, ed.: Intelligent
Multimedia Information Retrieval. Boston,
MA, 1997: MIT Press, 339 – 356.

[3] A. Kobsa, W. Pohl: The User Modeling Shell
System BGP-MS. User Modeling and User-
Adaptive Interaction 4 (1995), 2, 59-106.

[4] G. D. Abowd et al.: Context-awareness in
wearable and ubiquitous computing. 1st Inter-
national Symposium on Wearable Computers,
1997. Proceedings of ISWC'97, October 13-14,
1997 in Cambridge, MA, USA.
(http://www.cc.gatech.edu/fce/pubs/iswc97/we
ar-poster.html)

[5] E. Not et al.: Person-oriented guided visits in a
physical museum. ICHIM’97, Paris, September
1997.

