
Museum International



ISSN: 1350-0775 (Print) 1468-0033 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rmil20


The virtual museum

Jonathan Bowen

To cite this article: Jonathan Bowen (2000) The virtual museum, Museum International, 52:1, 4-7, 
DOI: 10.1111/1468-0033.00236
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0033.00236



Published online: 18 Dec 2018.


Submit your article to this journal


Article views: 315


View related articles
























Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at 
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rmil20

The virtual museum
JonatAan Boven







JonatAan Boven is considered by many as tAe ‘fownding fatAer’ of tAe Virtwal Library mwsewms pages 
(vvv.icom.org/ vlmp), one of tAe premier Internet sites in tAe mwsewm field. He is a lectwrer at 
tAe Department of Compwter Science, University of Reading (United Pingdom), vAere Ae leads tAe 
Formal MetAods and Softvare Engineering Growp and vas previowsly a senior researcAer at tAe Oxford 
University Compwting Laboratory. He Aas vorked in tAe field of compwting in botA indwstry and 
academia since 1377 and Aas served on more tAan fifteen programme committees inclwding a major 
vorking growp vitAin tAe Ewropean Union information tecAnologies programme, ESPRIT. TAe awtAor of 
140 pwblications inclwding nine books, JonatAan Boven von tAe 1334 IEE (Institwtion of Electrical 
Engineers) CAarles Babbage Premiwm avard. In 1337 Ae vas Aonorary cAair, vorksAop presenter and an 
invited speaker at tAe first ‘Mwsewms and tAe Web’ conference and Aas been an active participant in 
swbseqwent conferences.
This issue of Mwsewm International, to- gether with the previous issue, is dedi- cated to online 
museums. In the first issue we explored how online museum ‘com- munities’ are being formed and 
organized; here we consider some experiences of individual museums in using the Internet and the 
Web in presenting themselves online.

Museums  are  traditionally  information providers, drawing on and interpreting their collections 
for their visitors. Schools, the general public, tourists, scholars, etc., all potential museum 
visitors, are informa- tion gatherers. Previously these gatherers have had to physically visit the 
informa- tion providers; however, with the advent of the Internet, it is increasingly possible for 
the providers to reach out to the gatherers who may be located in their homes, workplaces, schools, 
libraries, etc. Museums are well placed to provide real content that is appealing to network users.

Producing a Web site can be difficult for museums. The first question should be, ‘Why do we want or 
need a Web site?’ Answers will vary for different museums, but it is very important to consider the 
experience from the point of view of virtual visitors and what they might wish to gain from using 
the museum Web site, rather than just considering what the museum has to offer. A museum with an 
online presence needs to build up its vir- tual visitor community just as it is desirable to 
encourage return visits by real visitors. Here are some particular points to con- sider when 
creating a museum Web site:

• Do not try to re-create the ‘traditional’ museum experience. The Web is a different 
medium with its own strengths and weaknesses, which should be exploited to enhance the virtual 
visitor experience. Vast amounts of informa-
tion such as museum catalogue data- bases can be made available online at relatively little cost 
since computer disk storage is cheap.

• Obvious and consistent navigation aids should be included on all pages within a Web site 
to allow a visitor to move easily within the site. For example, in a physical museum it may be 
difficult to find the entrance hall from some gal- leries, but in a virtual museum all loca- tions 
should include a hyperlink directly back to the home page for the museum.

•  Avoid making high-quality graphical images available unless you are happy for them to 
be reused by others. Such images are slow-loading and should never be included in navigation pages 
within a Web site. In addition, copyright issues may need to be addressed. It is worthwhile 
including a copyright notice where appropriate, but online copyright is an evolving area. Virtual 
visitors expect images, so low- and medium- resolution images (which do not print very well, but 
are adequate for screen viewing) should certainly be included.

•  A popular reason for searching a mu- seum Web site is to learn about a museum that may 
be located far from where the virtual visitor lives. This certainly raises awareness of the mu- 
seum and could well influence a visit if the person is ever in the same vicinity as the museum. 
This would bear further investigation to see exactly how large the effects are in practice. 
Whatever the influence exerted, it is likely to increase exponentially because of the expansion in 
use of the Internet itself.

Perhaps the most important feature in the design of a Web site for a museum is the home page or 
location at which most

5                               ISSN 1350-0775, Mwsewm International (UNEScO, Paris), No. 205 (Vol. 
52, No. 1, 2000)
© UNEScO 2000
Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 cowley Road, Oxford, OX5 1JF (UK) and 350 Main Street, 
Malden, MA 02158 (USA)








virtual visitors first arrive. The home page and  other  important,  frequently  used navigation 
pages should load quickly. Large, slow-loading multimedia resources (high-quality images, 
interactive media, video, audio, etc.) should be downloaded to the virtual visitor once an item of 
particular interest (e.g. associated with a specific museum object or gallery) has been reached.

An important facility that museums can provide is the presentation of online virtual  exhibitions,  
perhaps  mirroring actual exhibitions in the galleries, both temporary  and  permanent.  This  also 
allows access to material not otherwise generally available, such as objects in store (normally the 
vast majority of a serious museum’s collection), or those too fragile or sensitive for display. A 
recent survey has discovered that around three- quarters of virtual visitors expect to find virtual 
exhibitions at museum Web sites.¹ Increasingly, multimedia using graphics, sound, video, as well as 
text, is possible. The same survey indicates that 87 per cent of people visiting museum Web sites 
expect to find images. A major limiting factor at the moment is the speed of access, but this is 
likely to increase in the future (although not as fast as many would like).

Newsgroups and mailing lists allow dis- cussion between a group of people, potentially  
geographically  distributed throughout the world. Although museums could use suitable newsgroups to 
pub- licize their activities, so far few have taken advantage of this very cheap avenue of 
information dissemination to any great extent, perhaps due to lack of appreciation of the 
possibilities offered to interact with potential visitors. The Deja Web site (www.deja.com/) 
provides a convenient interface to many newsgroups.
Probably the most common reason for visiting a museum Web site is to explore a personal interest. A 
survey could well help with ascertaining the most useful types of information presentation and 
museums could put greater effort into more popular parts of their virtual sites. Most Web servers 
can record the number of ‘hits’ per page automatically, and this information could be very helpful 
in determining how the Web site is being used. Online forms for feedback (similar to the more 
traditional visitor books) are also worth while. In any case, it is very important for a museum to 
think carefully about why it wants or needs a virtual Web site, and what potential benefits this 
could bring.

This issue of Mwsewm International pre- sents the experiences of a number of diverse museums in 
creating, and even more importantly maintaining, an online presence. Jim Angus of the Natural 
History Museum  of  Los  Angeles  County  in California has much practical experience of these 
issues, having almost single- handedly set up the Web site for his museum. His article distils some 
of this knowledge.

While the United States certainly main- tains a lead in the percentage of museums with their own 
Web presence, museums from all over the world are starting to create Web sites. A. Enis Cetin, Omer 
N. Gerek and Ahmed H. Tewfik present the experience of creating a Web site for the Topkapi Palace 
Museum in Istanbul, Turkey, a museum with rich and diverse offerings.

Jim Devine has been very active in creating an interesting Web site for the Hunterian Museum in 
Glasgow, Scotland. He has used advanced technology such as QuickTime Virtual Reality to create 
online

© UNESCO 2000                                                                   5








virtual reality access to galleries. In his article with Ray Welland he covers some of the 
multimedia projects involving his museum. With the Hunterian Museum’s location within the 
University of Glasgow, Jim Devine has made full use of access to computer science students who are 
nor- mally very keen to collaborate in the pro- duction of Web-based resources for projects as part 
of their courses. This is something that other museums would be well advised to foster with their 
local university since it can result in excellent online resources at very low cost to the museum.

MUVA, the Virtual Museum of Arts El Pais, is unusual in that it is solely a virtual museum with no 
corresponding actual museum associated with it. Created in Uruguay to showcase art that could not 
be seen elsewhere, it is the country’s first virtual museum. It is very graphical in its 
presentation and has won a ‘Museums and the Web’ conference Best of the Web Award. Alicia Haber 
presents the experi- ence of setting up a virtual museum, including the thorny question of how to 
budget for such a project.

Lin Hsin Hsin is an artist and poet from Singapore who has created her own online Art Museum that, 
like MUVA, has no corresponding museum in reality. This virtual museum is a very personal project, 
reflecting the vision of a single artist. It clearly demonstrates that one of the great benefits of 
the Web is that it empowers individuals to act creatively, often to greater effect than much larger 
organizations.

Bogota´’s Museum of Gold is one of the rare  Colombian  institutions  to  have established a 
presence on the Internet. Eduardo Londono describes the experi- ence of setting up the Web site and 
how it was  revamped  as  users’  expectations become increasingly demanding.







Finally, Greg Van Alstyne is in charge of the Web site for the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New 
York, an extremely stylish site which won the top Best of the Web Award at the 1998 ‘Museums and 
the Web’ conference. The site takes a mini- malist approach, very much in keeping with the style of 
the museum itself, and the article presents some of the design philosophy behind it. Other museums 
would do well to visit MoMA online to attempt to emulate and learn from the structure and graphical 
presentation of this site.

While it is very important for individual museums to have their own online presence in the form of 
a Web site, e-mail communication and so on, as emphasized in the previous issue, it will be 
increas- ingly necessary for museums to organize themselves in a collective manner online. A recent 
example of such an initiative in the United Kingdom is the 25 Hour Museum 
(www.25hourmuseum.org.uk/). This includes information on some 2,000 museums around the United 
Kingdom, whether or not they provide their own online information, accessible as a search- able 
database.

A number of museums that do have their own Web sites are participating more actively as pilot 
sites. Each of these mu- seums provides special hidden informa- tion as part of their Web site that 
indicates the location of important standard data such as museum location, opening times, 
facilities for the disabled, etc. (Around thirty such categories have been desig- nated.) These 
pilot museums have ex- panded entries in the 25 Hour Museum database allowing virtual visitors 
access directly to the information they require about a particular museum without having to enter 
the museum’s home page and then  search  for  the  data  in  a  more

6                                                           © UNESCO 2000








haphazard manner. The 25 Hour Museum Web site also includes museum news, resources especially for 
children and a featured museum ‘Web site of the Week’, making it a dynamic site which visitors may 
wish to revisit. The 25 Hour Museum was recently designated a national mu- seum by Chris Smith, the 
UK government minister in charge of the Department of Culture, Media and Sport, and the site may 
well become the main online portal for UK museums.

The  English  novelist  Penelope  Lively (born 1933) wrote in her book Moon Tiger (1987) that ‘we 
carry a museum inside our heads’. Perhaps the Web is a way for museums to make some of their more 
ethereal information available to all.
But  it  should  be  recalled  that  online facilities are complementary to traditional museum 
services; ‘virtual museums’ will not replace real museums, but instead should  be  used  as  a  
tool  which  en- courages actual visits to actual museums.
■


Note

1. J. P. Bowen, ‘Time for Renovations: A Survey of Museum Web Sites’, in D. Bearman and J. Trant 
(eds.), Mwsewms and tAe Web
1333: Selected Papers from an International Conference, Nev Orleans, 11–14 MarcA 1333, pp. 163–72, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., Archives &
Museum Informatics, 1999.
























© UNESCO 2000                                                                   7
