The iMuse Virtual Museum: towards a cultural
education platform

Athanasios Fevgas, Nikolaos Fraggogiannis, Panagiota Tsompanopoulou, and 
Panayiotis Bozanis

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Thessaly

Volos, Greece

e-mails: {fevgas, nfragog, yota, pbozanis}@inf.uth.gr


Abstract—In the recent years, there is an extremely growing
interest for the digitalization of museums through the utilization
of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs). A
virtual museum platform, named iMuse is presented in this
paper. The platform aims to enhance museum visits, assist
visitors navigate inside the museum and to provide access to
multimedia content using the recent advances in Web, RFIDs
and communication technologies. In more detail, the iMuse
Virtual Museum is based on three components: Mobile Tour,
Virtual Presenter and Virtual Wing. The iMuse Mobile Tour
application consists of a tour guide system. It utilizes UHF RFID
technology to enrich museum visiting experience, through free
style tours, pre-defined tours, interactive educational games and
a group support service. The iMuse Virtual Presenter application
is a web platform for delivering multimedia presentation to
groups of visitors. Its objective is to enhance cultural knowledge
discovery by increasing access to museums' digital information,
using rich media content (text, images, video and sound). The
iMuse Virtual Wing comprise a user-aware virtual museum
environment that creates and presents a virtual representation of
the museum, providing multimedia content through specialized
filtering methods. iMuse platform is successfully utilized to
enhance  educational  programs  and  improve  cultural
understanding by connecting presentations with interactive
games  and guided tours.

Keywords—museum mobile guides, mobile applications,
cultural presentations, web presentation systems, RFID location
based services, cultural education, interactive games

I.  INTRODUCTION

Museums encounter several problems of introducing the
visitors the actual wealth of exhibits in their possession, i.e. to
present the environment where these exhibits are discovered,
and describe how they were utilized during their ages.
Moreover, many important artifacts are not accessible by the
visitors due lack of space. Thus, the very nature of a museum,
due to its inextricable relationship with the respective site(s) of
excavations and its daily interaction with visitors, offers great
challenges for scientists of both information technology &
communications area along with archaeologists/historians.

Nowadays many museums exploit ICT to ameliorate
visitor experience. At the same time, research efforts aim to
introduce new digital guides that utilize the latest advances in
software and hardware. The vast majority of the proposed
systems are intended for individuals or small groups like
families. The lack of systems that enhance the educational

aspect of a museum motivated us to propose iMuse tour guide
system. iMuse aims to open up new horizons, with respect to
better registering, studying, and ultimately, utilizing the
exhibits. It pursues to become more audience-centered while it
provides access to usable authoritative information as the
audience wishes, depending on its interests.

To achieve the above goals iMuse system introduces three
different applications for museum visitors: i) Mobile Tour
(MT), a tour guide system based on a handheld device, ii)
Virtual Wing (VW) [1], a user-aware virtual museum
environment running in info kiosks and iii) Virtual Presenter
(VP),  a web platform for composing and delivering multimedia
presentations.

Visitors have disparate needs and expectations concerning
knowledge discovery during a museum tour. However,
introducing a class of pre-childhood students to the everyday
life  of the prehistoric man has completely different demands
compared to exploring the exhibitions by history enthusiasts.
Thus, the support of various visitor types was considered as a
major demand for iMuse. Our efforts aim to provide museum
curators with tools for organizing and presenting cultural
content according to each visitor specific needs. Several other
requirements were taken into account in the system design and
development, like support of multimedia and multilingual
content.

iMuse is deployed in Archeological museum of Volos,
Greece. Currently, cultural content is formed for adults,
children and experts/enthusiasts, in Greek, English and French.
Descriptions applied to kids are additionaly edited by an
archeologist specialized in educational programs, while those
applied to experts include more detailed information (e.g.,
bibliographic references, related artifacts, etc.).

This paper intends to substantiate the educational aspects of
iMuse, through Virtual Presenter and Mobile Tour systems.
Through iMuse, a cultural topic or a historical event can be the
subject of a VP slideshow presentation, an educational game
and a pre-defined tour in the MT. Students and visitors after
attending  the  particular  presentation,  can  play  the
corresponding game and/or follow the tour to stimulate their
cultural understanding. Therefore our approach provides a
straightforward learning procedure to visitors and educators.

The rest of the paper includes related work in Section II.
Sections III and IV present Mobile Tour and Virtual Presenter
in detail. The architecture of iMuse platform and the


development procedure are described in V. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper and presents our future plans.

II.  RELATED WORK

and orientation. The system can be utilized for both navigation
and information services.

III. IMUSE MOBILE TOUR


Museums explore different ways to present their content

The iMuse Mobile Tour

[5] is a personalized mobile


and stimulate audience interest. Various systems incorporate
multimedia and projection technologies to create impressive
presentations¹ and stereoscopic reconstructions². These
approaches use custom designed multimedia content which is
composed and produced by experts and thus it is difficult to be
updated.

Web based office suites, like Google Docs³, Zoho⁴,
Microsoft Office Web Apps⁵ and open source Feng Office⁶
provide full featured presentation editors under saas (software
as a service) model. These systems enable online creation,
management and sharing of presentations.

However, there are no systems, in our knowledge, for

museum guide that provides full multimedia, multi-audience
and multilingual experience to museum visitors. The guide
relies on a mobile UHF RFID reader. The particular device is a
lightweight handheld touch screen computer, which exploits
RFID technology to recognize and distinguish the Museum
exhibits with high accuracy. RFID tags, attached to museum
showcases, provide access to exhibits’ multimedia information
in  the data repository. Information comprises text and vocal
descriptions, photos and videos from related artifacts and/or
excavation sites.

The operation of the iMuse Mobile Tour guide is based on
handheld's integrated pistol grip. The visitor should level at the


dynamic  composition  of  multimedia  presentations  for
educational purposes. This motivated us to propose Virtual
Presenter (VP), a web-based cultural presentation composer.
VP is enabled to create template presentations by retrieving
exhibit information from museum’s database.

The extremely growth of mobile device industry arises new
opportunities for dissemination of cultural content in museums.

tag position and pull handheld's trigger in order to acquire
exhibit information (Fig. 1). The guide supports free style
tours, pre and self-defined tours, and educational games. The
games urge to activities that users should accomplish by
locating the relative showcase and scan it with the RFID
reader. These activities are composed by an archaeologist that
specializes to educational programs. The device can be used
also  by a group of visitors. The tourist guide or a member of


Several approaches have been proposed involving either
visitors’ personal smartphones or special devices owned by
museums. Most of the research efforts seek to exploit sensors
incorporated to the handhelds.

RFID technology has been successfully applied to provide
tour guide services in museums. LF and HF RFIDs have been
utilized in mobile guide applications [2][3][4]. However, issues
related to imposed architectural interventions in the exhibition
led to the adoption of UHF RFID technology in [5], because of
the short reading range of LF and HF RFIDs.

A Wi-Fi based positioning system with accuracy less than
1m is presented in [6]. The system supports automatic delivery
of multimedia content and messaging services. A similar
platform [7] utilizes special designed Wi-Fi sensors to deliver
personalized cultural content on visitor’s personal mobile. The
proposed system is able to detect artworks close to the user
with accuracy over 91%.

Digital guides on visitors’ smartphones are becoming

the group uses the reader to access exhibits information while

the rest of the group receive the particular information in their
smartphones due to a context aware service presented in [11].

IV. IMUSE VIRTUAL PRESENTER

The iMuse Virtual Presenter (VP) (Fig. 2) is a web platform
for delivering multimedia presentations to groups of visitors.
An initial design of VP presented in [11]. Its main objective is
to increase access to museum’s digital content, and enhance the
education aspect of the museum, using rich multimedia content
(text, images, video and sound) embedded in presentations.
Presentations can be accessed either inside the museum, in a
special projection room (on-site) or remotely via web (on-line),
e.g., in schools during a preparation class prior to a museum
visit. VP enables the dynamic creation of presentations as well
as the combination of existing presentations for the

popular due to its increasing capabilities from the view of

screen size and resolution, processing power and sensors. The
overwhelming majority of modern devices incorporate NCF
(Near Field Communication) technology, an extension to the
HF RFID standard. Interactive mobile guides based on NFC
have been presented in [8][9]. A vision based approach for
indoor positioning is proposed in [10]. Authors utilize phone’s
camera and special designed markers to compute its position


¹ http://www.realstudios.co.uk/exhibitions/voyagers/

² http://www.chateau-nantes.fr/en/castle/the_nantes_museum/multimedia/

³ https://www.google.com

⁴ https://www.zoho.com

⁵ https://office.com

6 https://www.fengoffice.com

Fig. 1 iMuse Mobile Tour


museum database. Photos and videos, from excavation sites,
are also imported to the slide, if available.

The Presentation Editor is a presentation utility with


Fig. 2 Virtual Presenter

composition  of  new  ones  considering  audiences’
characteristics.

The system supports three different access levels: for
museum curators, guides or instructors and visitors, by
enforcing corresponding user roles. Curators are able to create,
edit and show presentations, utilizing information stored in
museum’s database. Instructors and tour guides are allowed to
compose their presentations by selecting and combining slides
from existing presentations. They do not have direct access to
the exhibit's detailed information, but only to presentations
already edited by the archaeologists. Finally, visitors attend
presentations that are created by the two other groups. The
three user types are supported under the demand of museum

presentation editing and viewing features. It enables removal or
reordering of slides, change of layout and contents, import of
photos or videos, persist of changes to the database and present
to the audience.

B. Presentation Synthesis

Presentation Synthesis role enables instructors or tour
guides to compose their presentations by combining slides
from already edited presentations. Thus, modified versions of
Presentation Creator and Presentation Editor are utilized.

The Presentation Creator provides search functionality for
presentations created by archaeologists based on criteria like
thematic entity, era, class, excavation site and museum’s hall.
The results are presented in a thumbnail viewer component,
containing the first slide of each presentation and its title. Any
presentation can be select for preview and used as template for
a new one.

The  limited  Presentation  Editor  does  not  provide
functionality to modify the contents or the style of the slides.
Only, insertion of new, removal, reordering and saving slides
are permitted. New slides are first located by a search utility
(that hooks Presentation Creator) and then dragged and
dropped to the presentation.

C. Presentation Projection

Presentation Projection role is assigned to everyone that
wants to access stored presentations. Presenter is a tool that is


curators, for controlling access to museum’s intellectual

property.

A. Presentation Authoring

Presentation Authoring role is assigned to museum
archaeologists and is enabled by two tools: Presentation
Creator and Presentation Editor. It organizes exhibit’s data,
connected semantically to each other into the form of
presentations and provides access to museum knowledge
according to the audience profile. Each presentation consists of
a number of slides and each slide contains exhibit’s
information. Exhibits can be either artifacts or collections of
artifacts organized in showcases.

The  Presentation  Creator  is  a  utility  for  editing
presentations using content from Museum's exhibit database
based on audience profile. It provides search functionality for

used to locate presentations of interest and supports two
different modes of presentation, the normal view and the
panoramic view. The two modes that can be alternated during a
presentation. In normal view, slides are presented one after the
other like in traditional presentation tools. In panoramic view,
slides are accessed through a 360 degrees panorama of the
museum, with the referenced exhibits highlighted as depicted
in Fig. 3.

V.  SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE


exhibits based on criteria like thematic
excavation site and museum lounges for

entity, era, class,
a given audience.


Results are displayed as thumbnails in a circular photo gallery
(Exhibit Browser). Each exhibit can be previewed and inserted
as slide to a new or existing presentation. Slide generation
process is fully automated. The new slide contains detailed
exhibit information like, description, dimensions, weight,
excavation site, era and bibliography, retrieved from the

Fig. 3 Virtual Presenter – Panoramic View



Fig. 4 Virtual Presenter Architecture

iMuse Mobile Tour architecture was exhaustively described
in [11], therefore in this document we focus in Virtual
Presenter. VP follows client – server paradigm as depicted in
Fig.  4.  The server side application is composed by five
services which are designed under a modified Model View
Controller architecture. The Control module implements data
access and business logic, while View module deals with data
representation.

The Request & Access Control service is a single entry
point for the server application. It receives client requests and
dispatches them to the appropriate services, controlling user
access level and applying the appropriate user role.

The Profile Control receives specified audience settings
(e.g., language, age, level of interest) and line them up to other
services.

The Exhibit Information service, provides data and
metadata about exhibits. Data may be text, images, vocal
messages and videos, while metadata specify which types of
multimedia are available for particular exhibits.

Presentation service implements all required processes in
order to maintain and store presentations.

Slide service manages slide operations and enables
presentation composers to copy slides from one presentation to
one other.

The client side consists of five modules, and actually
implements the user interface of VP. Presentation Browser,
Slide Browser and Exhibit Browser services enable searching
and selecting functionality for presentations, slides and exhibits
respectively. Searching functionality ensure straightforward
access to database data fulfilling various criteria (thematic
entity, era, class, excavation sites, museum lounges and
audience profile) defined by the user.

Projection module maintains user interface for exploring
and displaying available presentations, in normal or panoramic
view, according to audience’s preferences.

The iMuse Virtual Museum is developed by using open
source technologies. The application server and the data
storage reside to a central server running Linux. The data
storage is hosted by MySQL database management system.
The application server is developed using PHP and runs on
Apache web server. The VP is a web-based application,
developed using AJAX technologies (JavaScript, XML, CSS,
XHTML, DOM, etc.) to support asynchronous communication
with the server. An open source slideshow editor named
Slimey⁷, was used as basis for the implementation of
presentation editing functionality. Slimey uses SLIM file
format for storing presentations. SLIM slideshows are
composed using HTML, CSS and JavaScript.

VI. CONCLUTION

In this paper we presented a web platform for the
generation of presentations on cultural heritage. These
presentations may include images, texts, videos and audio and
can be attended by tourist groups or students either on-site in a
special projection room or remotely during visit preparation. A
synopsis of iMuse Mobile Tour functionality has also been
provided.

iMuse platform is successfully utilized in Archeological
Museum of Volos to enhance educational programs and
improve cultural understanding by connecting presentations
with interactive games and guided tours. The platform was
tested and evaluated by museum staff, visitors, students and
educators. Evaluation results for iMuse Mobile tour were
presented in [12]. Virtual Presenter was initially evaluated by
six members of Museum’s staff. This evaluation aimed to track
software bugs and highlight flaws in user interface and

7 http://www.fengoffice.com/web/wiki/doku.php/documents


functionality. The feedback was utilized to improve the system
and fix some bugs. Afterwards, the system was evaluated by
visitors, educators and students of Primary Education
Department of the University of Thessaly, during two 1-day
workshops. Workshop participants, after demonstrations and
self-practice with Virtual Presenter had to complete
questionnaires by using a scale from 1 to 5. The testers
evaluated Virtual Presenter as easy to use software, even by
inexperienced users (Mean=4.3) and reported searching
criteria,  for locating presentations of interest, as sufficient
(Mean=4.7). Already, prepared, by Museum’s archeologists,
presentations in the system fall within their expectations
(Mean=4.4) and improved their cultural understanding
(Mean=4.4). Most of the participants declared their intention to
propose  Virtual  Presenter  to  their  family/colleagues
(Mean=4.2). Finally, the majority of educators suggested to
Museum’s curators to enable online access of Virtual
Presenter, and pointed out that multilingual support may
benefit students of immigrant families.

The excessive growth of smartphone market arises new
opportunities  for  dissemination  of  cultural  information.
Modern mobiles are challenging platforms for museum
applications due to their increasing CPU power, large screen
size and resolution and incorporated sensors. We believe that
sensing technologies, like Near Field Communications (NFC),
will  play  important  role  in  development  of  museum
applications. Our future work includes the exploitation of these
characteristics for localization services and automated cultural
content delivery in visitor’s personal smartphones.

REFERENCES

[1]  C. Zigkolis, V. Koutsonikola, D. Chatzakou, S. Karagiannidis, M.
Giatsoglou, A. Kosmatopoulos, and A. Vakali, “Towards a User-Aware
Virtual Museum”, Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications
(VS-GAMES), 2011 Third International Conference on , pp. 228-235, 4-
6 May 2011.

[2]  N. Linge , D. Bates , K. Booth , D. Parsons, L. Heatley, P. Webb, R.
Holgate, “Realising the potential of multimedia visitor guides: practical
experiences of developing mi-Guide”, Museum Management and
Curatorship, 27:1, pp. 67-82, 2012.

[3] Y, Huang, S. Wang, F. E. Sandnes, “RFID-Based Guide Gives Museum
Visitors More Freedom”, IT Professional , vol.13, no.2, pp. 25-29,
March-April 2011.

[4]  J. Schwieren, G.Vossen, “Implementing Physical Hyperlinks for Mobile
Applications Using RFID Tags”, 11th Int. Database Engineering and
Applications Symposium, pp. 154-162, 6-8 Sept. 2007

[5]  A. Fevgas, P. Tsompanopoulou, A. Tsiovoulos, G. Drasidis, and P.
Bozanis, “Utilizing UHF RFIDs to Enhance Museum Visiting
Experience”, Proc. 14th Panhellenic Conference in Informatics, pp. 16-
20, Sept 10-12, 2010.

[6] M. Paschou, E. Sakkopoulos, A. Tsakalidis, G. Tzimas, E. Viennas,
“Intelligent Mobile Recommendations for Exhibitions using Indoor
Location Services”, in Tsihrintzis, G.A., Virvou, M., Jain, L. (eds),
Multimedia Services in Intelligent Environments - Recommendation
Services, vo. 4, 1st Edition, Springer Verlag, 2012.

[7]  A. Chianese, F. Marulli, V. Moscato, F. Piccialli, “SmARTweet: A
Location-Based Smart Application for Exhibits and Museums”, Int.
Conf. on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems (SITIS),
2013 International Conference, pp. 408-415, 2-5 Dec. 2013.

[8]  U. B. Ceipidor, C. M. Medaglia, V. Volpi, A. Moroni, S. Sposato, M.
Carboni, A. Caridi, “NFC technology applied to touristic-cultural field:
A case study on an Italian museum”, Near Field Communication (NFC),
5th International Workshop on , pp.1-6, 2013.

[9] P.C. Garrido, I.L. Ruiz, M.A. Gomez-Nieto, “Support for Visually
Impaired through Mobile and NFC Technology”, IT Revolutions,
LNICST 82, pp. 116–126, 2012.

[10] C. Barberis, A. Bottino, G. Malnati, P. Montuschi, “Experiencing Indoor
Navigation on Mobile Devices”, IT Professional , vol.16, no.1, pp.50-57,
Jan.-Feb. 2014.

[11] A. Fevgas, P. Tsompanopoulou, and P. Bozanis, “iMuse Mobile Tour: A
Personalized Multimedia Museum Guide Opens to Groups”, 16th IEEE
symposium on Computers and Communications, pp. 971-975, 2011.

[12] S. Bibi, P. Tsompanopoulou, A. Fevgas, N. Fraggogiannis, A. Martini,

A. Zaharis, P. Bozanis, “A Platform for Delivering Multimedia
Presentations on Cultural Heritage”, Proc. 14th Panhellenic Conference
in Informatics, pp. 175-179, Sept 10-12, 2010.

