Преглед НЦД 36 (2020), 1–12



Radomir S. Stanković
Mathematical Institute of SASA, Belgrade
Dušan Tatić
Faculty of Electronic Engineering, University of Niš



A SCENARIO FOR APPLICATION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN REPRESENTATION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL PARKS

Abstract.  The chief purpose of application of information technologies in representation of 
archaeological parks is a well-studied subject and the corresponding conclusions are clearly 
formulated. It is however much less done in their concrete applications. In this paper, we propose 
a possible scenario for application of information technologies in representation of archaeological 
parks. This scenario is primarily based on a purposely designed electronic guide and specific 
projection systems realized by the ARhiMedia group of the Mathematical Institute in Belgrade that 
is working at the Faculty of Electronic Engineering in Niš. In the design of such projection 
systems a special attention has been paid to achieving a reduced production price which makes them 
affordable by archeological parks in Serbia.
In the proposed scenario, the data of interests for a visitor are presented in multimedia form 
including text, photos, drawings, audio and video records and computer generated 3D objects, which 
is of a particular interest for reconstruction purposes. A purposely designed electronic guide 
enables the visitor to be independent on the guided tour and allows him to explore the site 
individually. In this way, the visitor takes an active role in creating the exhibition contents 
depending his personal interests, previous knowledge, and available time.
Keywords. Information technologies, projection systems, elecronic guides.


1. Introduction
Building an archaeological park over an archaeological site is a very complex and responsible task 
requiring to take into account various aspects, starting from strictly preserving  historical  
values,  authenticity,  and  integrity,  through  feasibility and maintainability, to providing 
accessibility and inclusiveness. Such a task is usually performed through a multidisciplinary 
project involving experts from different areas. As a recent example, we refer to [4]
where building an archaeological park is elaborated on a concrete example. Converting an 
archaeological park into an attractive tourist destination offering an engaging and immersive 
approach to learning and at the same time enjoying experiencing of cultural and historical heritage 
is a particular aspect of the related requirements and tasks to be implemented [2]. Information 
technologies, and also advent of related hardware, offer an important and powerful support in 
achieving such goals. At the same time, in attempts towards their application at concrete locations 
they open challenging problems which usually has to be solved for each individual archaeological 
park separately. Universal solutions proposed in the literature have to be adapted to the various 
restrictions and demands coming from the situation at a concrete archaeological site. Various 
problems can appear starting from very basic, such as power supply at particular positions within 
the archaeological park due to unavoidably restrictions to electrical network distribution, through 
security of installations and devices, insulation

2                    R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić

and amount of light during the visiting hours which particularly affects various projections, to 
the contribution of various information technologies based devices and related  applications  to  
the  understanding  and  the  interpretation  of  particular archaeological objects. These problems 
related to the engaging and implementation of new technologies into service of touristic industry 
and preservation and spreading information about historical and cultural heritages are a subject of 
intensive research usually carried out by multidisciplinary teams of researchers [9]. For example, 
this lastly mentioned problem of contribution in the case of the usage of 3D technologies for 
recording, processing, and presentation of archaeological data, is studied in [17].
Besides the main and most important goals as achieving interactive and immersive installations in 
presenting national historical heritage of Serbia, another issue that we are taking into account is 
proposing solutions that are inexpensive and therefore affordable for practical implementations 
presently. Thus, solutions proposed in this article are based on selected inexpensive hardware 
still providing high durability and simplicity in maintaining and easy handling by non-experts in 
information technologies employed at cultural institutions. This feature can be viewed as an 
important difference comparing to various other solutions proposed in the literature usually, if 
not primarily, aimed at implementation on archaeological parks supported by economically well- 
established touristic organisations and industry.
The software and hardware elements of the scenario proposed in this article are realized by the 
ARhiMedia group of the Mathematical Institute and verified as technical solutions within the 
project III 44006 supported by the Ministry of Science of Serbia and conducted by the Mathematical 
Institute of SASA. The group works at the Faculty of Electronic Engineering in Niš within the 
Laboratory for Computational Intelligence and Information Technologies (CIIT Lab).
A preliminary version of this paper was presented at XVII Conference Digitalization of cultural 
heritage, old written documents from natural and social sciences, and digital humanities, September 
17, 2019, Belgrade, Serbia.

2. Application of Information Technologies at Archaeological Parks
Information technologies have an important role in the presentation of cultural heritage in order 
to provide an engaging content to the contemporary society. Different studies based on information 
technologies have been proposed to attract and enhance the visitor experience. Therefore, 
multimedia solutions such as projection systems, mobile applications, and interactive installations 
have been realized with the purpose to enlarge the presented amount of information and provide a 
more compelling content of exhibitions compared to classical presentations based on printed panels 
that are necessary limited in the available space for text and images [5], [8], [16], [18], [19].
Creating interactive installations for archeological parks is a challenging and demanding task. 
Visitors presently expect more and more multimedia material to be shown depending on their interest 
and also within the available time. Therefore, the provided multimedia information should be 
quickly displayed in such a manner that can immerse a visitor into an interactive storytelling. 
Accordingly, the dynamic content of presentations should be realized to provide concrete 
information that will correspond to the visitors possessing a different level of knowledge on the 
subject. This leads to an improved visual presentation and better informing solution than the usage 
of classical leaflets, booklets and brochures. Another advantage of interactive installations is 
that they offer to visitors a possibility to move from passive observers to active creators of the 
exhibition during the tour across an archeological park. By selecting topics of their

R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić               3

personal interest in interactive installations, visitors are able to create by themselves the 
content of the exhibition.

In summary, information technologies should be a tool to achieve several, in a way contradictory 
requirement, such as
1. Offering interactivity with possibility for individual selection of topics of personal interest,
2. Ensuring amount of information large enough to meet interest of visitors with different levels 
of previous knowledge,
3. Providing attractive and compelling presentations.
Further, all this should usually be provided in a restricted time a visitor can devote to an 
exhibition, make the task challenging. Another issue it that the information technologies can help 
to devote a special attention to visitor with special requirements [1].
To achieve these goals, we propose a possible scenario for application of information technologies 
in representation of archaeological parks. This scenario is conceptualized with aim to guide the 
visitor through different stages during the archaeological park visit. Each stage uses a different 
solution such as mobile electronic guides or specific projection systems [3], [10], [12]. The 
mobile electronic guide acts as an interactive part of the presentation where the visitor has an 
active role due to possibility to navigate across the content according his interests. Purposely 
designed projection systems as these discussed below are used to provide global presentations on 
the important spots of the archaeological park. Special attention is paid to the inexpensive design 
of these projection systems which makes them affordable for archeological parks in Serbia.

3. The System Elements
The elements of a system realizing the scenario that we propose for implementation of information 
technologies in archeological parks are:
• Info point,
•  Inclined plane projection system,
• Projection pyramid,
•  Rear projection planes,
• Electronic guide.

Info point (Figure 1) is a conveniently shaped glass panel equipped with QR codes [11]. The glass 
was selected to ensure transparency to avoid blocking the view at the archaeological park, while QR 
codes serves as information provider. It is assumed that visitor can scan QR codes with his mobile 
phone and get basics information which can be shown in the form of images, text, audio or video 
records.

4                    R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić



















Figure 1. Info point

Inclined plane projection system (Figure 2) is a custom designed projection system constructed to 
synchronize two video projections on a horizontal and an inclined projection plane [6], [7]. The 
inclined plane realizes a holographic effect and can be viewed as a digitalized version of the 
Pepper ghost effect. The holographic effect is achieved by a monitor that is used to project an 
especially prepared video content on an adequately selected glass covered with a thin transparent 
coating of metal oxides. The horizontal plane serves as a projection screen for the either rear or 
front projection from a different signal source. The orientation of the projection depends on the 
position of the projector with respect to the horizontal projection plane, below or above it. In 
the first case, the horizontal projection plane is implemented as a transparent material, glass or 
plexiglass, covered by purposely selected projection transparencies. Synchronization of two videos 
is realized by custom designed software running on two interconnected Raspberry Pi computers. This 
selection of hardware components makes the system inexpensive.

R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić               5
















Figure 2. Inclined plane projection systems.

Projection pyramid (Figure 3) is a typical projection system aimed at producing the holographic 
effect when projecting 3D models. The proposed solution is specific compared to the commercially 
available projection pyramids, since a Raspberry Pi is used to run the video displayed on a simple 
monitor instead of usually applied classical computers or television screens. This makes the system 
inexpensive.

































Figure 3. Projection pyramid

6                    R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić


Rear projection planes (Figure 4) are aimed at projection of multimedia content on the custom 
designed shapes of transparent material which can be adapted to imitate a part on an enterior or 
exterior object. They are realized by using special projection transaprencies attached to a 
transparent surface such as glass or plexiglass. In the application on an archeological park, they 
can serve as reconstruction elements of ruins [5].













































Figure 4. An illustration of application of rear projection planes

Electronic guide is designed as a mobile application for devices such as smartphones or tablet PCs 
to provide detailed information and enhance the presentation for the visitors [13], [14], [15]. 
Depending on personal interest and time they can devote to the visit, visitors can choose items 
presented in the electronic guide in various

R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić               7
multimedia formats. An electronic guide consists of several modules that will be described below.
Map module (Figure 5) is created to navigate the user to the archeological site from either their 
current location, bus station, train station, or the city center. Also, interactive points of 
interest are implemented to offer the visitor guidance or provide additional information about 
specific spots within the archeological park.






















Figure 5. Electronic guide – Map module

List module (Figure 6) is made for a classification of archeological findings that are discovered 
on the site. For example, specific lists could be created for the archeological movable findings 
like coins, statues, and figures, or immovable findings such as palaces, churches or settlement 
areas. Interactive list elements with text and photos, 3D models, audio and video records, can 
provide additional information to the visitors.

8                    R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić


























Figure 6. Electronic guide – List module

Info module (Figure 7) shows the information about archeological finding in the form of text or 
audio. Also, image gallery and video player are embedded. When a 3D model is available, it can be 
displayed as an interactive object to show the digital reconstruction of some finding or 3D scanned 
archeological artefact from the depo.


























Figure 7. Electronic guide – Info module

R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić               9
AR module (Figure 8) by using camera of the mobile device enables to scan and recognize concrete 
marked pieces of objects in the archeological park and display virtual information to the visitor 
directly on the site. Pointing the camera towards the purposely marked places, the visitor can see 
various reconstructions and similar effects. This could be realized as 3D reconstructions which 
enables the visitor to virtually walk around the objects and observe from different angles findings 
that are physically unavailable or their physical reconstruction is expensive to be accomplished.






















Figure 8. Electronic guide – AR module

4. The Scenario of Application
In this section, we propose a scenario for application of the information technology system 
described above for improvement of the presentation of archeological parks. Figure 9 illustrates 
and explains the proposed scenario.
We propose to use first an Info point located near the entrance to provide by QR-codes initial 
historical information about the archaeological park so that visitors can be informed and prepared 
what they are going to see and explore. It is also good to use QR-codes to inform the visitor about 
technical details and also available facilities like working hours, souvenir shop, restaurants, 
possible walking paths, etc. Also, there should be information about possibility to rent a PC 
tablet with the electronic guide installed or download the corresponding application by the 
personal smart mobile device from Google Play or App Store.
After entering the archeological park visitors are advised to watch a central presentation 
displayed on an Inclined plane projection system. This device can be also used to present brief 
information about the history of the archeological park. The contents should be realized as 3D 
projections with animations for an impressive and immersive visual presentation and with an ability 
to simulate holographic effect at the inclined plane. The horizontal plane can be used to project 
an animated map of the

10                   R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić

archeological park with points of interests marked and accompanied with basic textual or audio 
explanations.
After watching the central presentation, the visitor is advised to activate his electronic guide on 
a personal or a rented mobile device. In this way, the visitor will navigate himself across the 
archeological park and use the electronic guide to get information about the objects of his 
personal interest. Also, the AR module embedded in the electronic guide enables interaction with 
objects at the archeological park. By recognition of various images at the site used as markers, 
such as patterns of mosaics or frescos, the visitor will get additional information in an appealing 
way. Furthermore, by using the AR module, it is possible to provide virtual reconstructions of 
objects how they have looked like in the past.
Rear projections planes located at the exact position where some objects existed in the past enable 
projecting 3D models to visualize the missing and destroyed parts. Alternatively, projection 
pyramids can be used to project 3D holographic simulation of destroyed objects, or artefacts which 
for various reasons are not exposed to the public.




























Figure 9. A possible scenario for application of information technologies in exhibitions at 
archaeological parks

5. Conclusion
Contemporary visitors of archaeological parks typically expect attractive multimedia installations 
and interactions at cultural heritage sites. Application of information technologies at 
archeological parks provides foundations for creating an engaging content and impressive visual 
presentation. The proposed hardware and software solutions and the scenario of their usage could 
immerse visitors into historical exhibitions. Also, by using the electronic guide a visitor takes 
an active role in creating his own way in exploring the exhibition according to his interests.

R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić              11

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to an anonymous reviewer whose constructive comments were useful in 
preparing the present version of the paper.

References
[1] Baker, E.J., Bakar, J.A.A, Zulkifli, A.N., “Mobile augmented reality elements for museum 
hearing impaired visitors’ engagement”, Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer 
Engineering (JTEC), 9:2-12(2017), 171–178.
[2] Bozzelli, G., Raia, A., Ricciardi, S., De Nino, M., Barile, N., Perrella, M., Tramontano, M., 
Pagano, A., Palombini, A., “An integrated VR/AR framework for user-centric interactive experience 
of cultural heritage: The ArkaeVision project”, Digital Applications in Archaeology and Cultural 
Heritage, 15, December 2019, 15 e00124
[3] Djukić, A., Antonić, B., Stanković, R.S., Tatić, D., „Digital mini-museum as an innovative and 
affordable presentation of local heritage for tourists: Example from Serbia“, Proc. of the 3rd 
International Conference on Tourism and Business 2019, Mahidol University International College, 
Thailand, August 2019., 1–11.
[4] Marchetti, N., Franco, G., Musso, S.F., Spadolinmi, M. B., (Eds.), An Integrated Approach for 
an Archaeological and Environmental Park in South-Eastern Turkey, Tilmen Höyük, Springer, 2020.
[5] Petrelli, D., “Making virtual reconstructions part of the visit: An exploratory study”, Digital 
Applications in Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, Volume 15, December 2019, e00123
[6] Radmanović, M., Tatić, D., Gajić, D., “A solution for synchronization of events in video 
projecting systems for multimedia presentations”, Proc. INFOTEH, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
February 19-21, 2014., 657–661 ISBN 978-99955-763-3-2, (in Serbian).
[7] Radmanović, M., Tatić, D., Gajić, D., “One solution for building reconfigurable multi- 
projection systems using the Adobe AIR platform”, Proc. Int. Conf. ICEST, Niš, June 2014., 121–124, 
ISBN 978-86-6125-108-5.
[8] Roberts, J., Banerjee, A., Hong, A., McGee, S., Horn, M. and Matcuk, M., “Digital exhibit 
labels in museums: Promoting visitor engagement with cultural artifacts”, Proc. 2018 CHI Conf. on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Montréal, Canada, April 21-26, 623(2018), 1–12.
[9] Rodrigues,J. M. F., Ramos, C. M. Q., Cardoso, P. J. S., Henriques, C., Handbook of Research  on 
 Technological  Developments  for  Cultural  Heritage  and  eTourism Applications, IGI Global, 
2018.
[10]   Stanković, R. S., Tatić, D., Tatić, D., Jovanović, N., „Digital museum in the Fortress of 
Niš – An example of application of information technologies in presentation of national historical 
heritage“, The 14-th National Conf. With International participation on Digitalization of National 
Heritage , old records from Natural and Social Sciences and Digital Humanistic, Beograd, September 
29, 2016., 16, ISBN: 978-86-7589-111-6
[11]   Tatić, D., Gajić, D., Stanković, R. S., QR codes telling the story about the history of 
Niš“, The Fifth Int. Conf. on Digital Presentation and Preservation of Cultural and Scientific 
Heritage - DiPP2015, Veliko Trnovo, Bulgaria,  29-30 September 2015, 133– 139, ISSN: 1314-4006.
[12]  Tatić, D., Stanković, R.S., Stojanović, J., Jovanović, M., „Application of information 
technologies in presentation of historical heritage of Niš“, Proc. Conf. Digitalization of Cultural 
Heritage in Niš Region, May 16, 2019, Niš, Serbia, 47–52.
[13]  Tatić, D., Stanković, R. S., Stojanović, J., Jovanović, M., „Universal electronic guide for 
museum exhibitions“, Proc. Conf. Digitalization of Cultural Heritage in Niš Region, May 16, 2019, 
Niš, Serbia, 54–62.
[14]   Tatić, D., Jovanović, N., Tatić, D., Stanković, R., Ognjanović, Z., „A case study of the 
usage  of  information  technologies  and  mobile  devices  by  visitors  in  museum environments“, 
The Fifteenth National Conference Digitization of Cultural Heritage, Old

12                   R.S. Stanković, D. Tatić

Records from the Natural and Social Sciences and Digital Humanities, Faculty of Mathematics, 
University of Belgrade, 2017, Beograd, pages 23, ISBN: 978-86-7589-121-5.
[15]   Tatić, D., Vitanović, N., Stevanović, K., Živković, N., Jovanović, N., Stanković, R. S., 
Ognjanović, Z., “Universal electronic guide developed in Unity environment”, The Fifteenth National 
Conference Digitization of Cultural Heritage, Old Records from the Natural and Social Sciences and 
Digital Humanities, Faculty of Mathematics, University of Belgrade, Beograd, 24 , 2017., ISBN: 
978-86-7589-121-5.
[16]  Tsai, H. and Sung, K., “Mobile applications and museum visitation”, Computer, 45:4(2012), 
95–98.
[17]   Tsiafaki, D., Michailidou, N., “Benefits and problems through the application of 3D 
technologies in archaeology – recording, visualization, representation and reconstruction”, 
Scientific Culture, 1:3(2015), 37–45.
[18]   Vlahakis, V., Ioannidis, M., Karigiannis, J., Tsotros, M., Gounaris, M., Stricker, D., 
Gleue, T., Daehne, P. and Almeida, L., “Archeoguide: an augmented reality guide for archaeological 
sites”, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 22:5(2002), 52–60.
[19]  Yoon, S.A., Elinich, K., Wang, J., Steinmeier, C. and Tucker, S., “Using augmented reality 
and knowledge-building scaffolds to improve learning in a science museum”, Int. J. of 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 7(4), 519–541.

Radomir.Stankovic@gmail.com
dule_tatic@yahoo.com
