See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/286441805

AR Turn-by-turn navigation in small urban areas and information browsing
Conference Paper · October 2014

CITATIONS

READS

4

104

3 authors, including:
Gianmarco Cherchi

Fabio Sorrentino

Università degli studi di Cagliari

Università degli studi di Cagliari

12 PUBLICATIONS 51 CITATIONS

15 PUBLICATIONS 51 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

VIRTUOSO View project

Cage Generation View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Gianmarco Cherchi on 01 June 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

STAG: Smart Tools & Apps for Graphics (2014)
Andrea Giachetti (Editor)

Short papers

AR Turn-by-turn navigation in small urban areas and
information browsing
Gianmarco Cherchi, Fabio Sorrentino, Riccardo Scateni
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Cagliari - Italy

Abstract
Navigation systems allow to discover cities and their urban areas easily and quickly, finding the shortest path to
reach them and giving directions to users saving their time and energy. At present time, these systems are based
over streets maps offered by the major mapping services like Tele Atlas, Navteq or OpenStreetMap.
In recent years, thanks to the Google StreetView service it has been possible to discover main cities locations both
indoor and outdoor. What is missing in this frame is the possibility to map small urban areas of small and medium
sized cities, due to their lack of relevance for the big players. In this cities there could be very interesting areas
for tourists. Example locations could be botanical gardens, archeological sites, protected natural areas among
others.
In this work we tried to set up a navigation system for limited extensions inside urban areas which permits to
wander around and gives access to related information using augmented reality techniques. Due to the possible
poor wireless coverage in these locations we designed an application that stores all required data on the user’s
device, splitting the information in packages according to the chosen language.
A key issue was to achieve good results combining all these features in a single device with a small display,
overwhelming the constraints due to the mobile environment.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Multimedia Information Systems—Artificial, augmented, and virtual realities

1. Introduction
Navigation systems allow to discover cities and their urban
areas easily and quickly, finding the shortest path to reach
them and giving directions to users saving their time and
energy. These systems are usually based over streets maps
offered by the major mapping services like Tele Atlas [Atl],
Navteq [Nav] or OpenStreetMap [Ope]. Google StreetView
has added the possibility to enter inside the map and to discover lots of cities locations both indoor and outdoor. Private
areas, and all the areas not accessible to the Google crew are
still not available, and this is true for most of the urban areas of this type in small and medium sized cities, due to their
minor relevance. But in these cities there could be very interesting areas of this kind for tourists like botanical gardens,
pedestrian only accessible archaeological or historical sites,
natural areas and such.
Often, in this sites, visitors are supplied with flyers and
guide books that possibly include a map with the major
c The Eurographics Association 2014.

points of interest (POIs). At the same time, several city eguides are available to tourists for their mobile devices, and
sometimes these guides are just PDF files often combined in
native apps developed for mobile systems like iOS, Android
and WP. The aim of our work was to develop a system for
the guided exploration of small, not Streetview-accessible,
urban areas giving access to the most relevant information
using augmented reality techniques. Since we cannot always
rely on wireless coverage we designed an application that
stores all the required data on the user’s device, splitting the
information in language-based packages. We than packed all
the features in a single app for mobile systems taking in account the size of the display and the features of the device
available on the mobile platform.
2. Related work
We have analyzed several works looking for applications
having in common the same technology (augmented real-

G. Cherchi, F. Sorrentino, and R. Scateni / AR Turn-by-turn navigation in small urban areas and information browsing

ity), the same device targets (smartphones and tablets) and
the same focus (tourism services). Both commercial applications and scientific prototypes are usually general purpose
AR broswers used to show different points of interest, giving
their geo-located position and related information. In these
works, the augmentation of the reality regards the overlaying of digital contents, based on the POI’s GPS location, like
label or placeholder.

known techniques used in navigation systems we created a
very simple interface easy to use, allowing to choose a destination point and showing how to reach it in a fashion similar
to the one of car navigation systems. Our main problem was
to achieve results similar to those of car navigation offers but
with the constraints that streets are smaller, points of interest
are really close each other and, in some cases, the GPS error
could be very high.

In [MGS∗ 12] Mulloni and colleagues say that the road toward such kind of applications is not easy due to a lack of
precision of navigation systems. Nowadays, this drawback
is less penalizing thanks to new mobile devices sensors that
are faster and more accurate. This works demonstrates how
users, that have access to the information provided on a 2D
map or via AR, prefer in most cases the use of the 2D map
because it gives greater precision and reliability compared
to the use of the augmented reality one. In order to have better results, and better usability of the AR applications while
increasing the accuracy, additional techniques are required.
These techniques are the same used in indoor navigation systems. These systems consist in specialized navigation applications for indoor environments that use both orientations
sensors and phone camera to guide the user inside a building without the GPS usage. They were developed in order
to create guides for museums or large buildings. An example of such a kind of indoor navigation system can be found
in [SDC∗ 10].

We then combined several principles taken both from indoor and outdoor navigation, trying to mix them offering a
turn-by-turn reliable system for visitors devices.

Talking about museum exploration another interesting
work using augmented reality is [CCH14]. Here the prototype uses a camera that recognize hands movements above a
marker and a corresponding action is performed. Using this
approach it is possible to observe and manipulate 3D digital
replicas of artifacts in real-time using hand-gestures instead
of the traditional keyboard and mouse setting. It is a type of
AR based exclusively on markers placed on various points of
interest in the museum. It provides information on the POI
but the user is not guided inside the museum.

3.1. Small urban area definition
As said before, in this work we focused on small urban areas, meaning those city areas as botanical gardens, parks or
whatever part that usually have these common characteristics:
•
•
•
•
•

Dedicated to pedestrians and/or cyclists;
Can be mapped on a 2D map;
Smaller (even much smaller) than 20 square kilometres;
Interesting spot for tourists;
Located outdoors.

3.2. User Interface
From the initial screen is possible to access all the application features. Choosing among them through a menu bar the
user is redirected to the relative feature view.

In our work augmented reality is used to enrich the navigation task and not just for giving more information at the
point of interest location.

3. Application design
As a proof of concept we created a first prototype, that
we called AR-Garden, considering a botanical garden as
case study. We wanted to support visiting scenarios where
tourists decide to visit the garden autonomously without the
aim of a tour guide. After an initial configuration, the ARGarden application allows users to navigate in the botanical
garden sectors autonomously, providing garden information
like sectors, plants species, points of interest and giving directions to reach them. Its main goal is to simplify the user’s
visit through a system of geolocated garden areas and points
of interest keeping track of user’s position. Following well

Figure 1: Main screen for navigation.
The navigation feature, the most important, allows the
navigation turn-by-turn. In the lower part of the screen a 2D
map is shown; on the map the user’s location is over-layered
and there are the destination point and the path to follow to
c The Eurographics Association 2014.

G. Cherchi, F. Sorrentino, and R. Scateni / AR Turn-by-turn navigation in small urban areas and information browsing

reach it. In the upper part of the screen, the phone’s camera preview is used, combined with augmented reality signals giving direction to reach the destination point. A 3D
arrow points to the current destination point (see Fig. 1). Using both views users can easily reach their selected points
of interest, saving time and energy. The user is also able
to change these two views in different ways depending on
his/her preferences (see Fig. 2).

Figure 2: The three layouts for navigation: combined (left),
only AR (center), and only map (right).

As we said before augmented reality techniques play an
important role in the AR-Garden prototype. The surrounding
environment, captured through the device camera, is augmented with additional information regarding the nearby and
geo-located points of interest layered over the stream of images. This means that the information about the position and
the direction to follow are shown when the user is in a particular location. Using system calls it is possible to retrieve all
sensors values such the current location (using latitude and
longitude), the azimuth, the direction to follow (pointed using an arrow icon), the destination sector and the estimated
distance to cover to reaching it. Other tabs allow to open
the sectors view and the related information (in this case the
plants and trees). The sectors area tab shows a list of all garden zones where a list of all plants is shown (see Fig. 3).

For each plant there are more information available like
the scientific name, a picture and detailed data such as the
family, the habitat, flowering period and more.
3.3. Map
The map is managed as a 2D image with an overall resolution of 2000×4205 pixels, allowing a good visualization on
devices with different screens sizes. In the system memory
we store only a part of the map (the currently visible one)
that is a subimage obtained cropping the original one. This
technique leads to an efficient use of system resources and
consequently to a more fluid application usage. We developed our application prototype on Android 2.3.3. This Android version is installed on phones and tablets with a single core where loading the entire map in the memory is too
heavy. The trick used to improve the map loading allows the
application to be used also on middle range devices. On the
map we also implemented the classic manipulation events
such as Drag and Pinch to Zoom to improve the navigation
functionality.
3.4. Augmented reality
With the word augmented we mean a process of enrichment
the reality perceived through the five senses, adding digital
information using a computer or a mobile device. In tourism
related application, this technology is often used to show information related to a city or a monument that one is just
visiting. There are basically two types of augmented reality:
• The first one is the geo-localized AR, usually used in mobile devices equipped with a positioning system and with
a set of motion sensors; through the screen device the surrounding environment is enriched with more information
on several layers based on geo-localized POI’s;
• The second one is based on ARTags, used both on mobile
devices and desktop computers through the detection and
recognition of specific markers (usually drawn with black
and white geometric shapes); recognizing these markers it
is possible to show digital media like photos, videos, 3D
models combined with audio file adding interactivity to
the experience.
In our case study we used geo-localized AR. In order to
do it we use the device built-in sensors like the GPS or the
compass. The GPS sensor provides information on the user’s
location using longitude and latitude and the compass sensor
provides the azimuth measure.
3.5. Shortest path

Figure 3: The information on a single sector (left) and on a
single plant (right).

c The Eurographics Association 2014.

To find the “best” path between two points we have to store
first a set of nodes and a set of existing paths, storing these
information in a graph. In this structure, each node represents an area of the map or a cross between two paths, while
the arcs between the nodes represent the possible connection

G. Cherchi, F. Sorrentino, and R. Scateni / AR Turn-by-turn navigation in small urban areas and information browsing

between the various sectors. The “shortest path” Dijkstra’s
algorithm implementation made possible to search for the
best routes between sectors/nodes.
3.6. Navigation
Using the obtained information by the device sensors, and
using appropriate geometric operations, the user’s position
can be plotted over the map. In our implementation we use
the map as a Cartesian plane, transforming the previous (A
point) and the current (B point) GPS position in XY coordinates on the plane. After every position’s update the distance between A and B and the angle between the straight
line passing through the two points and the X-axis are computed. To find the new position we calculate ∆x and ∆y and
we add or subtract them appropriately to the current position.
In particular ∆x = dist × cos α and ∆y = dist × sin α, where
dist is the distance between the two geographical positions
appropriately transformed into pixels, and α is the angle between the straight line passing through the two points and
the X-axis calculated using the following formula (where
Lat=latitude, Lon=longitude):
dy = Lat(B) − Lat(A)
  π


dx = cos
× Lat(A) × Lon(B) − Lon(A)
180
180
α = arctan(dy, dx) ×
π

The following step consists in recomputing the direction
of the arrow (that indicates the way the user should follow to
reach his/her destination) based on the last position update.
This is done by considering the current position, the target
position and the user’s orientation based on the destination.
We calculate the angular coefficient m of the straight line
passing through the points A and B where A represents the
current position and B is the point to be reached.
∆x = xA − xB
∆y = yA − yB
∆x
m=
∆y
∆x or ∆y equal to 0 mean that the user is moving along one
of the Cartesian axes otherwise we find the angle of rotation
of the arrow calculating arctan(m).
4. Conclusion and future work
Brochures paper and bulky signals often used in small areas
such as a botanical garden can be replaced using digital tools
such as AR-Garden. The user interface, for this reason, was
created simple and intuitive, without too complex features or
annoying graphics elements that can distract users. Overall

we are satisfied with the achieved results, and we envision
that using other sensors and techiques used in indoor navigation system our application can be improved.
The AR-Garden application has been tested in two steps:
the first one emulating the user position and the second one
directly on-site. To emulate the GPS signals we used an Android emulator using a gpx file. Through a connection between the terminal system and the emulator it is possible
to simulate the GPS coordinates evaluating the application
behavior in a controlled environment, avoiding GPS signal
precision issues. The provided directions, using augmented
reality (based on user’s position and destination point), are
correctly displayed as expected. Thanks to these results we
can affirm that the used navigation algorithm is enough accurate for our purposes.
Once we decided to try the application on site we have
obtained different and not so good results. The well known
GPS signal error is really significant and caused bad results during our testing. The main problem was due to signal
strength, since the signal acquisition is difficult in covered,
or partially covered, areas (i.e., during a cloudly day in a park
with trees). This leads to high errors in the device positioning during the environment discovering. In our case of study,
the Botanical Garden of Cagliari, we have encountered this
problem because it is almost totally covered by trees forming
a barrier between satellites and user’s device. This leaded to
a low GPS signal or a distorted pair of coordinates, and we
have estimated that this error was even 20 meters in the worst
cases. This implies that the navigation based on GPS coordinates is not enough to offer a good turn-by-turn navigation
in these kind of areas. We are working on a new application version that uses inertial indoor navigation systems to
achieve better and reliable results.
Our future plans include the development of a complete
framework able to let developers create a turn-by-turn navigation system just changing the application contents.
References
[Atl]

ATLAS T.: mapinsight.teleatlas.com. 1

[CCH14] C HEN C.-Y., C HANG B. R., H UANG P.-S.: Multimedia augmented reality information system for museum guidance.
Personal and ubiquitous computing 18, 2 (2014), 315–322. 2
[MGS∗ 12]

M ULLONI A., G RUBERT J., S EICHTER H., L AN T., G RASSET R., R EITMAYR G., S CHMALSTIEG D.:
Experiences with the impact of tracking technology in mobile
augmented reality evaluations. In MobileHCI 2012 Workshop
MobiVis (2012). 2
GLOTZ

[Nav]

NAVTEQ: www.navteq.com. 1

[Ope]

O PEN S TREET M AP: www.openstreetmap.org. 1

[SDC∗ 10] S ERRA A., D ESSÌ T., C ARBONI D., P OPESCU V.,
ATZORI L.: Inertial navigation systems for user-centric indoor applications. Networked and Electronic Media Summit,
Barcelona (2010). 2

c The Eurographics Association 2014.

View publication stats

