Building Digital Collections for Archeological Sites: Metadata Requirements
and CIDOC CRM Extension
Georgios S. Gkrous‡ and Mara Nikolaidou†
†

Department of Informatics and Telematics, Harokopio University of Athens, 17671, Athens, Greece.
mara (at) hua.gr
‡

Department of Library Sience and Information Systems, TEI of Athens, 12210, Athens, Greece
gtgkrous (at) yahoo.gr

Abstract: Cultural heritage information management
and provision can be improved by the usage of Internet
and related technologies. The research effort presented in
this paper focuses on the creation of a digital collec- tion
representing an archeological site. Such a collec- tion is
composed of digital entities representing monu- ments
and describing them using proper metadata. Such a
metadata model should provide information for the
monuments, ease the visitation of the site by Internet
users and promote it. It can be based on CIDOC CRM,
which is a formal ontology for the uniform description
of cultural resources. CIDOC CRM’s specification focuses on museum documentation, thus it is necessary to
extend the ontological model to effectively describe archeological sites, emphasizing spatial characteristics and
facilitating the integration of the archeological site
monuments with exhibits hosted in other sites, for example museums. Thus, metadata fields describing the
structure of physical objects, e.g. monuments, and spatial and conceptual correlations between exhibits are
explored.
Keywords: Digital collection, CIDOC-CRM, Ontology,
Cultural heritage, Archeological site
I. INTRODUCTION
Utilizing information and communication technology
(ICT) to promote cultural heritage remains a hot topic
(Papaconstantinou, 2008). The explosion of Internet usage
indicated an alternative way to advertise the visi- tation of
archeological sites and museums significant to every
nation’s history. Therefore, especially for coun- tries such
as Greece being characterized by cultural richness,
promoting archeological sites by enhancing their digital
presence on the Web is a task of significant importance.
Information regarding a visit to an archeological site can
be categorized to pre-visit and during-visit data (British
Museum, 2006). Pre-visit information is usually provided
via tourist guides or a Web site, targeting to attract and
provoke all interested people to actually visit the site.
During-visit information consists of the mate- rial used to
ease the visitor’s walk around in the site and enhance
his/her experience by additional information. Special
brochures, which include a site map and a short
description of all monuments, or audio devices, playing
recorded messages related to the monument in multiple
languages according to input keys, are usually available.
Such tools have specific restrictions. Few pages of a

164

tourist guide or general data displayed on a web page
may not be considered as satisfying by the interested
visitor. In such case, he/she may search for additional
information after the visit has ended. The attendance of
professional guided tours is always an alternative, but as
the technology has penetrated every day life, the usage
of mobile devices as smart phones, may be considered
as a way to provide information to visitor during the
visit. In such case, advanced navigation services around
the site may be provided along with all kinds of information regarding monuments and exhibits that might be
moved away from the site for numerous reasons (for
example preservation, security, etc).
A world wide trend is observed regarding the use of
telecommunications in the cultural field. Related research efforts exposing the benefits of such cooperation
are the creation of a cultural information network on
Canada (CHIN), the virtual outdoor museum in Latvia
and the preservation of English and French landscapes
using image processing (Hemsley et al., 2005).
The benefits of exploring ICT to promote cultural
heritage are expressed by the numerous research projects conducted all over the world. This effort is supported by European funded projects regarding digital
libraries, digitalization techniques and Internet archives.
Digital cultural experiences field refers to the exploitation of edge technology tools for increasing the knowledge and experiences that cultural heritage sources (museums and archeological sites) share to the public and is
explored by projects are ARtSENSE, CINeSPACE and
CHESS (European Commission, 2011).
Regarding faced restrictions on a archeological site, by
using new technologies it is feasible to represent a
monument in a digital form and portray its original or
current shape (visualization, animation) (Vlachakis et
al., 2001). Furthermore, multiple geographical and conceptual connections between monuments can be established in order to present an integrated aspect of History
(for example objects with the same creator or similar
use). Advanced services such as navigation for mobile
users can be provided guiding visitors among the site’s
monuments (Bonfanti et al., 2007) and giving all additional information according to their position. The provision of such a service can be facilitated by the creation
of a digital collection for archeological site, utilizing
digital library technology. The collection should contain
monument related information and enable navigation.
Additional material, for example digital animations representing monuments in their original form, as well as

INTEGRATED INFORMATION

digital representations of their current state, may also be
included. The digital collection may be useful as duringvisit, pre-visit and post-visit data, since it might constitute a continuous source of information for the visitor.
Museums, for example the Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg (http://www.hermitagemuseum.org/html_En
/12/hm12_0.html) or the Tate Gallery in London
(http://www.tate.org.uk/collection/) have successfully
employed such projects during the last decade.
Such digital collections should be described in a common
fashion, supporting their integration in larger collections,
as Europeana pan-european cultural digital collection
(http://www.europeana.eu/portal/), and enable searching
their content in a unified fashion. Thus, CI- DOC
Conceptual Reference Model was proposed by the
International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC)
of the International Council of Museums (ICOM), as a
formal ontology created to support information exchange between heterogeneous cultural sources.
In this paper, we explore the potential of building a digital
collection for an archeological site, focusing on digital
object structure to depict monuments and the metadata
requirement for their efficient description. The adoption
of CIDOC CRM is suggested for this purpose, while the
proposed extensions are discussed.
II. DIGITAL COLLECTION CHARACTERISTICS
The creation of a digital collection for an archeological
site and the rendering of an advanced navigation service
using its material is the focus of our effort. Every
monument will be represented by a digital entity described by all related data. Multiple connections between objects of the same site (spatial relations) and
between objects that are placed on another site or museum (conceptual relations) must be supported. The
provision of the advanced navigation service relays
upon maintaining all necessary information related to
monuments (Gavalas et al., 2005). The benefits of such an
effort relate to both the strengthening of the site’s digital
presence (pre-visit information) and the im- provement of
services’ quality when visiting the site (during-visit
information).
The information structure and management must be
conducted taking into consideration information heterogeneity, principles of semantic web, simplification of
information
and interoperability (Ravindranathan,
2004). For this purpose, we identified the requirements
the supported metadata scheme should satisfy and explore the potential of using CIDOC CRM .

Group, in collaboration with ISO aims to form an international standard (ICOM/CIDOC, 2010).
The main objective of CIDOC CRM is to provide all the
semantic clarifications in order to allow the enlargement
of local resources to global ones. It pro- vides a formal
language concerning cultural heritage, especially
museum documentation, for the definition of data
relations. It aims to be used as a guide for all inter- ested
parties, when structuring and relating cultural information assets, to support associative queries by providing a basic model of associations and to ensure that
the implementation of data transformation algorithms
will be performed without loss of meaning. The intended scope of CRM is to cover not only museum but
all types of collections (arts, archeology, ethnography)
and contribute to the harmonization between cultural
information, libraries and archives.
The CIDOC CRM model contains classes, properties
and inheritance rules. Classes and properties can be
identified by their initial code (E for classes and P for
properties). By its structure, CRM model is extensible
and users are encouraged to create new instances according to their needs (Cripps et al., 2004). The latest
released version (Version 5.0.2 January 2010), CIDOC
CRM includes 90 classes and 148 properties.
An example representing reasoning about spatial information is shown in Fig.1. The relations between main
classes and their subclasses are shown as arrows and
properties as rectangles. An exhibit represented by
Physical Thing is connected to Place via the actionproperty Has current location. Place can be identified by
Place Name, Address or Spatial Coordinates.

Figure 1. CIDOC CRM spatial information

III. METADATA FOR ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES

Β. Metadata Requirements

A. CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model

In a digital collection for an archeological site, every
monument is represented using a digital object (complex or simple), which encompasses all related information and corresponding connections with the other
monuments. The set of digital objects constitute the
digital collection of the archeological site. All the information required to fully describe each monument are
grouped into two basic categories: Physical Info, related

The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model is the outcome of a long term development work carried out by
the International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC) of the International Council of Museums
(ICOM). Since 2000, the development group responsi- ble
for CIDOC, named CIDOC CRM Special Interest

ADVANCES ON INFORMATION PROCESSING AND MANAGEMENT

165

to the monument as perceived in the physical world and
Digital Representation Info, related to the digital representation of the monument. Each of them, is further
decomposed into subcategories, as represented in Fig.2
based on CIDOC CRM concepts and notation.
Subcategories of information consist of metadata, describing the monument or its digital representation and
digital material representing the monument. They are
discussed in the following:
•
Structural info: It is divided into two subsets specifying whether the object is part of a monument (Part
Of info) or it is contained by/contains other exhibits
(Contain Info). The introduction of these relations is
necessary for sufficient description of situations, which
are very common in cultural heri- tage, where a
monument is divided into constituents or it may contains
other artifacts, as sculptures. The location of digital object
parts should be specified. This way, in the case where
a
sculpture
found within a building during the
excavation of the site is moved to a museum, the visitor
may be informed and have access to it during his/her visit
in the site.
•
General info: It contains descriptive info about the
exhibit regarding its creator, its cause of creation, its
use, the submitted procedures (excavation, reconstruction, restoration, modification) and the responsible persons that have performed these ac- tions, the
historic periods that all actions have taken place, the
material, the used tools and its owner.

• Multimedia info: It is composed of two subsets
(images and videos). The subset of Images includes
digital processed images that show the original or
current form of the exhibit and contribute to an integrated aspect of the object through visualization. The
subset of Videos is a gallery of video files from
excavation, object modifications and animated representations, related to the monument.
• Correlation info: It is consisted of two subcategories that refer to geographical and conceptual correlations ( Spatial info, Conceptual info). The set of spatial
information include navigation data to all objects that
belong to the monument’s surroundings and
the
corresponding path to be followed. The path is
defined by parameters as direction, distance and height
that can be processed by a geographical information
system (GIS) for assisting the provi- sion of the
navigation service (Coors, 2004).
The conceptual information includes links to all ob- jects
that are semantically related to the specific monument
and their location (other archeological site or museum).
Additionally, the reason of ob- jects’ similarity is
provided, for example they be- long to the same
collection, they have the same creator or use. The role
of this set is quite signifi- cant, since conceptually
related objects contribute to visitors’ understanding of
the historical se- quence.

Figure 2. Metadata categories describing archeological monuments

C. CIDOC CRM extension
CIDOC CRM provides concepts for description of museum areas. Supported classes and properties facilitate the
administration of museum’s content. In the case of an
archeological site, CIDOC CRM may support the
presentation of some constituents, but is not adequate
for the representation of all the information depicted in

166

Fig.2. In order to overcome these restrictions, we suggest the extension of the model, focused on certain directions.
Detailed classes should be introduced regarding the
procedures an object is submitted to (related to General
info). Current entities supported by CIDOC for this purpose are Activity, Modification and could be enriched
with Excavation, Reconstruction and Restoration. Fur-

INTEGRATED INFORMATION

thermore, new classes must be added for multimedia
data including relative videos and images presenting the
current/original form of the exhibit.
Important extensions concern structural and correla- tion
information. Since CIDOC CRM was developed for
museum oriented purposes, it does not provide the tools
for the exploration of the way an artifact is related to its
surroundings. Object’s structural data representation is
limited by two basic restrictions. Firstly, there are no
instances to sufficiently represent a physical artifact as a
part of a larger monument (for example a part of Parthenon’s aetoma). Furthermore, there is no adequate
representation of exhibits being contained by other exhibits (for example the artifacts of an ancient arcade).
These circumstances are very commonly met on an archeological site and must be effectively represented in
the digital world. New classes and properties must be
created to specify, if the object is a part of another one,
and also allocate the remaining parts. Similar actions
will be performed for detailed description of objects
containing or being contained by other objects (addition
of contain(ed) tag and connection with the other object).
Concerning spatial correlations, CIDOC CRM cur- rent
release contains only one entity (spatial coordi- nates)
for the definition of object’s position. New classes
and properties must be defined specifying the
surroundings (objects that are in a close distance) of
each exhibit and the path that should be followed. Path
class will have Direction, Distance and Height as subclasses. This procedure defines a unique path between
two objects which is very important for GIS system and
the navigation service. Conceptual relations are also not
supported by the latest release of CIDOC CRM. New
entities and actions must be created to relate similar
objects and simultaneously specify the reason of similarity and the location of objects that do not belong to
the site.
IV. CONCLUSIONS – FUTURE WORK
The proposed research targets the creation of digital
collections for archeological sites supporting pre-visit
and during-visit experience. It facilitates the navigation
of the visitor on site using a smart mobile phone and
enhances the visitor’s experience.
Compared to already developed museum navigation
services (Cosley et al., 2009), it supports a wider range
of provided information, by supporting interrelations to
exhibits placed on another site or museum, exceeding
the strict boundaries of the archeological site. A wider
cultural heritage source is created in order to fulfill all
visitor’s learning needs.
Digital content organization and management is performed by the usage of the CIDOC CRM ontology
model, thus it is extended to describe archeological
sites. Metadata requirements for the creation of the proposed digital collection for archeological sites were
documented and corresponding CIDOC CRM extensions were identified. New classes and properties must
be added to describe structural and correlation

information.
We are currently on the detail definition of an ontological model based on CIDOC CRM and its
application on an archeological site. The metadata
model will be assessed and technical specifications for
its support and provision of the advanced navigation
service will be defined.
REFERENCES
Bonfanti C., Chiabrando F. and Spano A., “Studies
and knowledge fusion in archaeological site maps
managed in a 3D GIS”, XXI International CIPA
Symposium, 01-06
October, Athens (2007).
British Museum, “Tours of adult ESOL
students”, http://www.britishmuseum.org/pdf/previsit%20information%20for%20class%20tutors_aug06
.p df [retrieved 29 July 2011].
Coors, V., “Using Wearable GIS in outdoor
applications”, Extended Abstract on International
Workshop for Inter- active Applications of Mobile
Computing, Germany (2004).
Cosley D., Baxter J., Lee S., Alson B., Nomura S.,
Adams P. , Sarabu C. and Gay C., “A Tag in the
Hand: Supporting Semantic, Social and Spatial
Navigation in Museums”, Proceedings of the 27th
international conference on Human factors in
computing systems, Boston (2009).
Cripps P., Greenhalgh A., Fellows D., May K. and
Robinson D., “Ontological Modelling of the work of
the Centre for Archaeology”, CIDOC CRM Technical
papers (2004).
European Commission,“ICT Research in FP7”,
http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/telearn-digicult/digicultprojects_en.html[retrieved 15 July 2011].
Fox E., Gonçalves M., Watson L. and Kipp N.,
“Streams, structures, spaces, scenarios, societies
(5s): A formal model for digital libraries”, ACM
Trans. Inf. Syst., vol.22, pp. 270-312 (2004).
Gavalas
D. and Economou D, “Development
Platforms for Mobile Applications: Status and
Trends”, Department of Cultural Technology &
Communication, IEEE Software,
28(1), 77-86, Mytilene, Lesvos, Greece (2010)
Hemsley J., Cappellini V. and Stanke G., “Digital
Applica- tions for Cultural and Heritage Institutions”,
Chapter 1, Introduction and International Overview
(2005).
ICOM/CIDOC Documentation Standards Group,
“Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference
Model”,http://www.cidoc-crm.org/index.html,
[retrieved
20 July 2011].
Papaconstantinou D., “The materiality of cultural
information and its absence: Digital curation from an
archaeological perspective”, 2008 Annual Conference
of CIDOC, Ath- ens (2008).
Ravindranathan U., “Prototyping Digital Libraries
Handling Heterogeneous Data Sources - An
ETANA-DL Case Study”. Masters Thesis.

ADVANCES ON INFORMATION PROCESSING AND MANAGEMENT

167

Computer Science, Virginia Tech (2004).
Vlahakis V., Ioannidis M., Karigiannis J. et al,
“AR- CHEOGUIDE: First results of an Augmented
Reality, Mobile Computing System in Cultural
Heritage Sites”, Proceedings of VAST (2001).

168

INTEGRATED INFORMATION

