Chapter 6
Interpretation of Zeugma Museum by Tourist Guides
Uysal YENIPINAR*
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the importance of tourist guide’s interpretive role has increased and has begun to
be included in foreign scientific studies. It is seen that tourist guides’ interpretive roles have gained
importance in promoting local culture and cultural heritage. The main purpose of the study is to identify
how historical, mythological, ecological belief and cultural images with high artistic value depicted in
mosaic panels in Zeugma Mosaic Museum can be interpreted in an entertaining and accurate way after
going through tourist guides’ information strainer with literature review, visual elements and
participating tourist guides’ suggestions. Providing information about the artifacts in the museum
necessitates knowing and interpreting many disciplines, in particular art history and archeology.
Therefore, in addition to historical, mythological, geographical and socio-cultural subjects, tourist
guides need to be knowledgeable on many different subjects like presentation techniques, diction,
animation ability, group psychology and visitor profile and they also need to apply these. On the other
hand, since the study is a new subject, it is expected to contribute to the literature on tourist guiding and
the promotion of Zeugma museum.
Professional tourist guiding is a work area with rich human relations, high professional return and
satisfaction. Tourists believe that successful guides have extensive knowledge on the visiting places and
attraction elements (Yu, Weiler& Ham, 2001). Ap and Wong expressed that tourist guides have the
ability to turn a museum visit into an unforgettable learning experience for the visitors (Ap & Wong,
2001). Tourist guides give confidence to the group with their interest and knowledge. The feeling of
confidence raises the visitors’ expectations of experiencing a new cultural experience without feeling
the difficulties of being in a foreign country. From this aspect, tourist guides contribute to the
preservation and promotion of the cultural and natural heritage of the countries where they work at. On
the other hand, a guide’s foreign language skills have important part in cultural mediation and knowing
both languages provides the guide the opportunity to defend one culture to the other culture fairly (Yu et
al., 2001: 79). Partaking in the application of package tours prepared by tour operators, tourist guides
play important role to meet the aforementioned needs in the name of travel agency and tour operator.
On the other hand, it is known that the roles of tourist guides in interpretation of destination culture and
cultural mediation are gaining importance. Through the example of Zeugma Museum mosaics, the study
evaluated how the interpretive roles of tourist guides were effective in passing complicated subjects.
2. Literature
Tourist guides bear the responsibility to make written, visual and auditory, artistic and historical
themes meaningful for the tourists with the education they have gotten and pass this information to them
in an entertaining way. While fulfilling these responsibilities, they draw on their communication and
interpretation abilities. Where there is intense competition in the tourism sector, countries develop
different strategies to be the preferred destination and try to ensure customer loyalty by focusing on
tourist satisfaction. It is seen that the countries that prioritize tourist satisfaction aim to raise service
quality. It is known that tourist guides take a role in destination promotion, tourist satisfaction and
raising destination loyalty. The changes in tourist expectations has widened tourism industry and
brought multidimensionality. Tourist guides and their professional roles also got affected by the changes
and their roles turned into much more diverse and comprehensive roles compared to their solely guiding
roles during the beginning years of tourism.
Interpretative Roles of Tourist Guides: While performing their professions, tourist guides have
*

Assist. Prof. Dr., Mersin University, Faculty of Tourism, Tourism Guiding Department

important and multi-faceted roles. Role is a behavior expected from a person who is assigned to a
certain position or function. Tourists’ changing travel trends have affected and changed the roles of the
tourist guides who show around and are the closest person to the tourists. In 1985, Cohen defined guides
as pathfinders who guide and lead the visitors in regions and environments where the visitors did not
know and experienced before. The role given to the tourist guides in Cohen’s seminal definition is being
“pathfinders”. Today, tourist guides’ tasks got diversified and became more comprehensive and
functional, going beyond only guiding. Professional tourist guides, the leading actors in tourism, are the
tourism workers who the tourists visiting Turkey spend the longest time with and most affected from,
who take responsibility and get authorization during the moments when services turn into actions, who
generally accompany tourists during their trips and who have the opportunity to have direct
communication with the tourists (Genç, 1992; Karaçal&Demirtaş, 2002; Zengin et al., 2004; 2011;
Çetin& Kızılırmak, 2012; Güzel et al., 2013). To be a cultural mediator, a tour guide needs to mediate
information and encounters but their elaborations on what these roles entail provide new insight beyond
which has been previously written in the literature. Stronger support must be provided to tour guides,
particularly to the new comers who may need intercultural training. If excellence in cultural
interpretation and mediation is to be achieved, commitment and support from all sides, government, the
tourism industry, employers and the guides themselves, is vital (Yu, at al., 2004: 7). Today’s tourists are
as knowledgeable and interested as tourism professionals about destinations. They are sophisticated
tourists who gather information from different channels; compare similar destinations and who prefer
destinations that offer different opportunities before the trip. Today, it is known that tourist trends are
towards education, experience and entertainment (Fennell&Iagles, 1990:28). The positive change in the
attitudes and behaviors of the visitors informs the resource managers that interpretative tour guiding can
be an effective and desirable educational tool. Thus, the negative change in attitudes and behavior suggests a need for better training of guides in design and delivery of interpretation (Poudel&Nyaupane,
2013:10).
In other words, interpretation of information can give tourists new insights and understandings of
the area they visit and the culture and environment they experience. The Society for Interpreting
Britain’s Heritage defines interpretation as “the process of communicating to people the significance of
a place or object so that they enjoy it more, understand their heritage and environment better, and
develop a positive attitude toward conservation” (cited in Moscardo, 1999: 8). This definition assumes
there is a ‘correct’ significance of a place or object that must be known before people can enjoy or
understand their experience. Reisinger and others brought a different perspective to the interpretation
skills of tourist guides. According to them, there is also an ulterior motive for offering the interpretation:
to influence the tourists’ attitude towards conservation (Reisinger and Steiner, 2006). Moscardo (1998)
identifies three main ways in which interpretation can contribute to the quality of visitors’ experience.
“These are: (1) providing information on the available options so tourists can make the best choices
about what they do and where they go; (2) providing information to encourage safety and comfort so
tourists know how to cope with and better manage encountered difficulties (e.g. sea sickness) and
understand messages given by the warning signs (e.g. ‘you cannot swim here’); and (3) creating the
actual experience so tourists can participate in activities such as guided walks, eco-tours, visit art
galleries, fauna sanctuaries or zoos, and learn in areas of educational interest” (Moscardo, 1996: 382).
Interpretation also means a kind of humor, analogies, metaphors; opportunities to ask questions,
provision of variety, and structuring logically presented information help to build links between the
interpretative content and the everyday experience of visitors. These deceptively encouraging words
lose some of their appeal when one realizes that Moscardo et al. (2004) are not advocating that tourists
make links between their experiences and their current knowledge but rather between someone else’s
interpretations and their current knowledge. According to Ham (1992) and Moscardo (1998),
interpretation enhances visitor satisfaction. To achieve this, Moscardo (1999) believes interpretation
should incorporate differences into interpretative experiences, provide personal connections for
visitors, practice participation, create clear content, and allow for alternative audiences.
Dahles stated that tourist guides should be seen as people who encourage tourists to see, hear,
smell, taste, feel and experience other cultures (Dahles, 2002: 785-786). In a study conducted by Müküs
74

in 2009, the participants listed the qualifications of a tourist guide as follows: to know archeology, art
history and foreign language; to be able to follow innovations; to be knowledgeable on the region; to
have good communication skills. It is determined that tourist guides’ qualifications and skills and
meeting the tourist expectations play a key role in tourist satisfaction. In the study, also, stress that
tourism sector, media and government officials see the subject as a more comprehensive subject than
meeting the roles of the tourist guides and giving information. On the other hand, tourist guides are
obliged to preserving the country and destination they work in (TUREB, 2004). This obligation gives
the tourist guides in Turkey the role of “cultural and natural history preserver”. According to the
definition of Turkey Tourist Guidance 2013 regulation, “tourist guides are people who guide domestic
and foreign tourists in languages written on their identity cards, who have scientific and comprehensive
knowledge on the historical, cultural and natural heritage of the regions they are promoting, who can
reflect the country’s image in the best way with their knowledge, who ensure the tour programs
organized by travel agencies are executed how it was sold to the customer in line with the written forms
of the travel agencies and who guide organized groups/people in museums and archeological sites”.
Tourist guides accompany tourists during their trips and ensure that their trips go smoothly. Therefore,
on the one hand, they identify the visitors’ satisfaction levels and on the other hand they reflect and
identify Turkey’s and Turkish people’s image with their knowledge, attitudes and behaviors
(www.myk.gov.tr). According to the definition of World Federation of Tourist Guide Associations
(WFTGA), a tourist guide is a person who guides domestic and foreign groups or individual visitors in
the language of their choice, who guides monuments, museums, cultural and natural heritage of an area
and passes information in an entertaining way and who is recognized by the appropriate authority.
According to Ahipaşaoğlu’s definition, a tourist guide is a person who accompanies tourists, visitors
and guests, who gives accurate information about protected sites, museums, monuments, tombs,
temples, historical artifacts and ruins, folklore, cultural and artistic artifacts, hand crafts, souvenirs and
entertainment places and who helps execute various sports like mountain and nature hikes, water sports,
hunting, skiing, caving, ornithology, parachuting, botany, bike and horse tours (Ahipaşaoğlu, 2001).
In intercultural formations, there is generally a cultural gap between the visitor and the visiting
area. For this reason, in areas where cultural heritage based on tourism activities occur tourist guidance
service with information on high standards is demanded. On the other hand, tourist guides take on the
role of mediator between local culture and culture of the tourists and can be described as “cultural
mediator” since they offer communication between the tourists and the local people (Leclerc & Martin,
2004). In addition to developing tourists’ experiences, tourist guides directly play the role in “cultural
mediation” and “intercultural communication” between the local culture and visitors (Yu et al., 2001:
77) because the guides have great knowledge, skills and experience in where visitors should go, what
they should see or what aspects of the local culture the visitors should establish relationship. Tourist
guides play an important and decisive role in the visitors’ satisfaction from tour organization and travel
experiences and in promotion of Turkey and Turkey’s image. Thus, training qualified tourists guides
who will represent Turkey and Turkish people with their knowledge, skills, culture, attitude and
behaviors, who will accurately promote and who will ensure visitors returning to their countries
satisfied and with positive impressions is of great importance (Tosun&Temizkan, 2004).
According to Ham and Weiler, with meeting service expectations based on experiencing the
product the tourist buys through interpretation, the tourist will be satisfied, customer loyalty will be
ensured and destination’s sustainability will be increased (Ham&Weiler, 2002). In their report titled
“Interpretation Reduces Ecological Impacts of Visitors to World Heritage Site”, Littlefair and Buckley
emphasized the effectiveness of a skilled tourist guide’s narratives based on interpretation. They also
mentioned that tourist guides reduced the negative ecological effect the visitors have on world cultural
heritage sites and that the effect on these sites are due to the tourists’ attitudes, behaviors and knowledge
rather than being biological and physical (Littlefair&Buckley, 2008). Changes in people’s behaviors
were identified after educational experiences (Holbrook & Hirschman, 1982; O’sullivan & Spangler,
1998; Lasalle&Britton, 2003; Ballantyne et al., 2011; Penz&Hogg, 2011). ‘Effective interpretation
enables visitors to make connections between the information being given and their previous knowledge
and experiences’ (Moscardoet al., 2004: 13). This can be achieved by using clear, simple explanations
75

to reduce the gap between the information and visitors’ current knowledge. Also, humor, analogies,
metaphors, opportunities to ask questions, provision of variety, and structuring logically presented
information help to build links between the interpretative content and the everyday experience of
visitors (Moscardo et al., 2004: 13).
It is a known fact that tourist guides create awareness in the visitors with their interpretation skills
about preservation by drawing attention to the importance of local culture for world cultural heritage.
The interpretation skill of the tourist guide overlaps with ethics of responsibility. Ethics of responsibility
is to define an action, behavior and attitude that need to be done in terms of the situation’s unique
conditions and behavior’s results. Ethics of responsibility is also called situational ethics (Yarcan,
2007). Situational ethics is the change of attitudes and behavior types according to context under
unclear conditions (Keskin, 1999). There is the principle of pragmatism in ethical behavior. This
principle is based on the idea that there are no fundamental and valid values and man does what he does
for the good of the majority. Doing whatever needed for the right action is not related to philosophy; it
is rater a behavior towards solution (Kuçuradi, 1999). Ethics is values criteria that identify evaluations
and attitudes in human relations. Travel agencies work with guides who they know from before and had
business relations with before. Tourists and leaders of tour groups prefer professionals they have known
and worked with before. Tourist guides execute the tour program, solve the problems arising in the
name of customers and travel agency and they are directly responsible from the tour’s success. The
guides determine the tourist’ perception of travel experience and images of travel and country to a
large extent (Dahles, 2002).
Functions of Museums and Tourist Guides: Contemporary museums are cultural centers where
visitors learn while having fun and where visitors enjoy learning (Atagök, 1982: 2). With their
interpretation and entertaining narratives, tourist guides help the visitors to visualize and learn the
objects they see and to gain aesthetic appreciation and historical awareness. According to a definition
made by International Council of Museum-ICOM, “a museum is a non-profit, permanent institution in
the service of society and its development, open to the public, which acquires, conserves, researches,
communicates and exhibits the tangible and intangible heritage of humanity and its environment for the
purposes of education, study and enjoyment” (Mclean, 1996). “A museum is intended to provide
interest, education and enjoyment to its visitors, the quality of the experience being dependent on many
variables from the age and education of the visitor and the kind of museum collection to the exhibition
presentation and visitor services” (Capstick Brenda,1985:365-372). “Educational” function of
museums is directing in addition to collecting, preserving, examining, evaluating and exhibiting.
Museums can be described as free choice or informal learning environments (Kelly, 2004; Rabley,
2005; Grant, 2005). Visitors voluntarily learn the subjects they are interested in more easily and more
permanently by experiencing through the tourist guides. The quality of the experience depends on many
variables. Visitors’ age, education level, museum collection, exhibition presentations, exhibition type,
presentation and visitor services are among the main objectives (Capstick Brenda, 1985: 365-372).
Museums are places where people from many different cultures visit and have education. For this
reason, reputable museums put much effort in exhibitions and providing information to the visitors
(Abacı et al., 2005; 114).
Today, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) subbranch Social and Human Sciences is largely concerned with transformation of daily life (Altaylı, 2011:
2). Here, it is extremely important to elaborate the difference between scientific knowledge and
narrative knowledge. Today, intangible heritage refer mostly to narrative knowledge and museums
assume an important role in rescuing this knowledge kind from the dominance of scientific knowledge
that totally leaves out human lives’ daily aspects (Lyotard, 2000: 16). Museums offer opportunities for
the creation of identity. For this reason, museums are places where a society’s historical, cultural and
natural values are collected, protected and presented for educational purposes (Buyurgan,Altın&Oruç,
2007; Mercin&Özsoy, 2005; Oruç, 2008: 125-141). Museum learning can be defined with concepts like
informal, inner directed, optional and life-long (Hughes, Jackson & Kidd, 2007; Gray &Chadwic,
2001). It is known that studies on museums are conducted for purposes like personal development,
restoration and education. Intrinsic motivation in museum increases the objective gained from the
76

museum. Museums function as a kind of educational institution reflecting culture and history
(Oruç&Altın, 2007).
With the education they have received in subjects like art, history, culture, cultural heritage,
destination management, tourist guides make sure the visitors are not bored, entertained and leave the
museum satisfied and also contribute to the development of museum science. By promoting the artifacts
in the museums to domestic and foreign tourists, tourist guides contribute to museums’ education and
culture functions. With the tourist guides’ interpretations of artifacts during museum trips, the visitors
go on a journey to the past in their minds and explore humans’ cultural reflections. This process helps
the visitors to make new connections in their lives and create meaning and help their personal
development.
Gaziantep Zeugma Museum: Zeugma Mosaic Museum is located in the city center of Gaziantep
in Turkey’s southeastern region. Founded to the west coast of the Euphrates, the city is the region’s
most important commercial and industrial city. Just like the historical Zeugma city, Gaziantep owes this
to its location on the fertile land along the Euphrates River an as Silk Road’s gateway to the Middle
East. With its Zeugma Museum, Turkey became one of the rare countries owning the rich mosaic
mosaics of the Roman of the Roman period. The museum building covers an area of 30.000 square
meters. With its 1450 square meters mosaic area, Zeugma Museum became the world’s biggest mosaic
museum, taking the title from Tunisia’s Bardo Museum. Zeugma Museum building is comprised of
three different buildings. Congress and culture center, mosaic museum, exhibition and conference center
and archeology museum make up the museum complex. Between the museum and administration
building, there are souvenir shops where the visitors can walk around without being bored. With their
artifacts and exhibition styles, museums tremendously draw the interests of the visitors and become
touristic attraction centers for the cities all by themselves. 40-square-meter mural, four Roman
fountains, 20 columns, four sculptures made from limestone, a bronze sculpture of Mars, grave steles,
sarcophagi and architectural pieces whose restorations were completed are exhibited in the museum.
The atmosphere of the places where the mosaics were removed from was created and the mosaics
were placed in their assigned spaces with modern museology understanding. Keeping kids in mind,
mosaics are reflected on the museum’s floor with visual light plays. Visitors walk on these visual
mosaics on the floor. Visitors are curious about the pool made out of colorful natural stones and the
mosaics that are used as wall panels and look like a large painting and their mythological stories.
Another feature of Gaziantep Archeology Museum is its seal collection. The collection is made up of
100.000 seals reflecting the archive of the ancient city of Zeugma. With this number, the museum is the
number one in seal collection. Rich descriptions on the terra-cotta seal inform the visitors about
Zeugma’s economic, social and religious life and its relations with other ancient cities
(http://www.zeugmaweb.com). A seal is a security system giving an idea about where and from whom a
letter, decree or package is coming and a system ensuring the shipment goes without being opened.
Mosaic: Pebble stone tesserae (neatly cut stone), transition to mosaic technique, seen in the
Mediterranean World at the beginning of third century BC. (Üstüner A.C., 2002: 22).
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
For the study, literature and visual data about the museum were reviewed. Phenomenology, a
qualitative research method, and face to face interview technique were employed in the study. The main
data collection tool in phenomenological studies is interview. It is important for the researcher to
establish a safe and empathy-based interactive environment with the interviewed individuals. In
phenomenological studies, the interviews are generally long. To bring out and explain the experiences
in-depth, the researcher should enter an intense interaction with the interviewed individual or
individuals. Since there is an opportunity to show the explanations and meanings reached by the
researcher to the interviewed individuals and for them to confirm them, the study’s validity and
reliability of the study increase (Yıldırım&Şimşek; 2013). The study sample are 15 active tourist guides
who are registered to İzmir, Antalya, İstanbul, Adana and Nevşehir Chamber of Guides and who
frequently do Gaziantep tours with domestic and foreign package tours and guide in Zeugma Museum.
The number of participants was limited to 10 since some of the participants gave similar answers and 5
people did not want their names written. Face to face interviews were conducted with the participants
77

during the low season, February and March, of 2016. During the interviews, new questions were added
and some questions were omitted from the semi-structured question form that was used as the data
collection tool. Question forms were revised considering the questions the tourists frequently ask about
the museum and the mosaics and the questions the tourists might ask.
3. FINDINGS
The participants stressed that it would be impossible to answer the questions directed to them from
only one source. They stated that their answers came from the vocational courses they took during
college, Turkish and foreign books they read archeologists they met during their tours to the protected
sites and museologists, architects, art historians and artists that participate in their tours. They also
stated that their knowledge enriched and interpretation skills improved with the questions asked by
culture groups. They told that they will answer the questions about the interpretative narration of
Zeugma museum mosaics without sticking to a book or any other work as they synthesize and interpret
in their minds after reading, listening and seeing.
Participants gave the following answers to the question of “where do you first start narrating and
how do you start it?”
While we approach the museum with the tour bus, we see camel caravan sculptures that are evocative
K1, of the historical Silk Road. The statutes attract the attention of the tourists. They take pictures and look
K5, at me with questioning eyes. I start with explaining the two factors that make the two cities, Zeugma
K4, and Gaziantep, important. I start with explaining the importance of both of them being founded along
K6, the banks of the Euphrates and on the intersection of historical routes. When we get off the bus, we
K7, take a group picture with the museum stairs, museum sign and museum building at the background.
K8, They love this. They always say that taking a picture was a great idea. They love this even more when
K9, the tour finishes and they look back at the pictures. Later, I give information about the Zeugma
K10 museum building and the most important artifacts exhibited in the Zeugma museum.
We also start our narration with the camel caravans on the way to the museum. We stop in front of the
panel that has the Zeugma city plan and model on and we make sure they see the plan and the model.
By this way, we make the visitors imagine the city I their minds. On the map, we explain which
museum mosaic was removed from where and from which villa, we explain along which bank of the
Euphrates the city was founded on and the historical location of it. After this visual narrative, our tour
group begins to listen to us attentively and does not want to miss a single word. If we have time, in the
museum’s theater we watch the movie about the short history of ancient city of Zeugma in different
languages. All of these help the visitors to make sense of the large-scale mosaics they will hear their
stories from us soon after and the time and culture of the people who made these mosaics. I gather the
group under the shade by the wall across the museum canteen. We sit and face the museum building
and I start talking about the museum. While they listen to me, I make sure they see the museum. Here, I
talk about the area of the museum, the functions of the buildings, the size of the mosaics, how the
mosaics after four years of restoration were placed on the museum floors with a design that is similar
to the villa the mosaics were taken from, geometric colorful mosaics that look like a carpet and how
they can walk on the light displays on the colorful floor made for the children.

The answers of participants to the question of “What are the characteristics that make the museum
important?” are as follows;
With their artifacts and exhibition styles, museums tremendously draw the interests of the visitors and
K9, become touristic attraction centers for the cities all by themselves. 40-square-meter mural, four Roman
K10 fountains, 20 columns, four sculptures made from limestone, a bronze sculpture of Mars, grave steles,
sarcophagi and architectural pieces whose restorations were completed are exhibited in the museum.
The atmosphere of the places where the mosaics were removed from was created and the mosaics were
placed in their assigned spaces with modern museology understanding. Keeping kids in mind, mosaics
are reflected on the museum’s floor with visual light plays. Visitors walk on these visual mosaics on
the floor. Visitors are curious about the pool made out of colorful natural stones and the mosaics that
are used as wall panels and look like a large painting and their mythological stories. Another feature of
Gaziantep Archeology Museum is its seal collection. The collection is made up of 100.000 seals
78

reflecting the archive of the ancient city of Zeugma. With this number, the museum is the number one
in seal collection. Rich descriptions on the terra-cotta seal inform the visitors about Zeugma’s
economic, social and religious life and its relations with other ancient cities
(http://www.zeugmaweb.com). A seal is a security system giving an idea about where and from whom
a letter, decree or package is coming and a system ensuring the shipment goes without being opened

Participants gave the following answer to the question of “Where was the large size mosaics found?”
According to Mr. Ergeç (2000); Museum takes its name from the ancient Roman city of Zeugma.
Zeugma was founded by Alexander the Great in 300 BC with the name “Selevkia Euphrates”. In the
year 64 BC the Roman general Pompeius surrenders to Antiachos I. One of the four big cities of
Commagene Kingdom, the city was connected to the Roman Empire in 31 BC and took the name
“Zeugma” meaning “bridge” and “gateway”. While the city had great wealth and splendor during
K1, the Roman Empire, it was conquered by Sassanid ruler Shapur I in 256. With the conquest, the city
K3, was sacked and demolished and later forgotten.
K5, The first excavation work in Zeugma, which is an archaeological site of primary importance, was
K5, started in 1987 in the South of Belkis Hill by the Gaziantep Museum. During excavations conducted in
a rock tomb and its surroundings, many sculptures left by traffickers were found. These sculptures
were made of limestone. The buried people were transferred to the Gaziantep Museum and are
presently exhibited there.
Excavation works were carried out in the antic site gained a new dimension with the start of the
construction of Birecik Dam on the Euphrates, which was contracted out to an international
consortium (Birecik A.S.) in 1993 on build-operate-transfer model. Following studies that asserted the
dam’s threat on the area, the Ministry of Culture and Tourism started "urgent excavation and rescue
work" in 1992. As a result of this work carried out by the Gaziantep Museum, villas, floor mosaics,
frescoes and various other remains were unearthed. Also found during this excavation was a splendid
mosaic on the wedding of Dionysus and Ariadne. 2/3 of this mosaic, however, was stolen in 1998.
Upon the start of construction, tomb steles with eagle and basket relieves, a beheaded sculpture and a
floor mosaic with goddesses of seasons were found in 1993 and they were removed and transferred to
the Museum in 1994. In 1993, Prof. David Kennedy from the University of Western Australia joined
excavations carried out by the Museum. During his work, Prof. Kennedy found that the floor mosaic of
a Roman villa was also displaced by traffickers. Further investigations revealed that the mosaic taken
from the site was that of two immortal lovers, Metiox and Partenope and that the mosaic was in the
private Menil Collection in Houston, US. Upon the initiatives of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism,
the mosaic was returned to Gaziantep Museum in June 2000.
Participants gave similar answers to the question of “Who made the Mosaics done and where were they
used?”
K1,
K2,
K3,
K4,

Zeugma is inside the Persian border region of the Little Asia province and is the only gateway
bridge on the Euphrates connecting East to the West. When the Gaziantep region came under Roman
sovereignty, 4th Scythian Unit, one of the 30 legions, was founded in Zeugma. The presence of the
unit enlivens the trade. When trade attracts wealth and wealth attracts artists, Zeugma becomes a
big city with its 70.000 population. The commanders and traders made pools with mosaics
constructed inside their villas along the banks of the Euphrates to cool them. The mosaics were used
on the floors, pools and pavements of the villas. This need attracted traders, artists, scholars and
clergy to the city of Zeugma. It is known that the art of mosaics reached its peak between the 2nd and
5th centuries in Antakya and Zeugma. When the mosaics are excavated and transferred to the
museum, mosaics and their secrets woke from their 2000 years old sleep

Participants gave the following answer to the question of “What are the topics of the mosaics in the
museum?
In the big mosaic panels transferred to the museum ancient gods like Poseidon, Oceanus, Tethys,
K3
Aphrodite, Perseus and Andromeda and various topics like Dionysus’s wedding, Danae and
K4
Euphrates gods are portrayed. The visitors can see the portrayals of how Achilles disguises himself
K5
as a woman not to go to the Trojan War, how Aphrodite was born out of the white bubbles of an
oyster to the coast of island of Cyprus, grape and wine god,
79

Dionysus, the life tree that grows out of the water coming from the pitcher of the Euphrates river
god and the endangered bald ibis that today lives on the Birecik rocks along the banks of the
Euphrates.
The Gypsy Girl mosaic became the museum’s symbol. With her big eyes, she watches the visitors
wherever they go. There is a gypsy neighborhood in Gaziantep. Their lives are intertwined with
music. Since the big-eyed gypsy women’s headscarf tying style looks like the girl’s style in the
museum, people gave this name to the mosaic.
On the other hand, on the 2nd floor of the 2nd section to the right of the museum, there are nature and
animal mosaics on the large panels on the floor and the wall. What is interesting is some of the
animals like stubborn goats, sheep and wild birds can be seen today but some of the animals
portrayed in the mosaics like giraffes, elephants, lions and tigers do not live in Anatolia anymore.
Participant mentioned how the 1.50 meter bronze statue of war god Mars symbolizing abundance
and strength was found nearly undamaged underground during the excavations. What is interesting
about the Mars statue is that the statue is holding a spear in one hand and flower on the other hand.
It is believed to represent an artistic spirit who knows how to fight but prefers peace.

The responses given by participants to the question of “What is mosaic? Is there a technique?” are as
follows:
Mosaic is the art of creating images on a surface with an assemblage of small colorful pieces like
stone, enamel, glass and wood. To protect the small pieces creating the decorative figures, mortar at
the same level as the pieces facing up was used. Mortar was soft at the beginning of the application
K1,
but hardens afterwards. In this architectonic surface, another characteristics that differentiates
K5,
mosaic art from other art branches is that mosaics did not lose any of their color characteristics
K6
even though thousands of years have passed (Üstüner, 2002: 7).
Mosaic as decorative art of any architectural area is lining up colorful little stone pieces or prismshaped pieces made out of terracotta on a cement bed. Mosaic stones are called tessurula or
tesserae in Latin and mosaic floors are called pavimenta in Latin and musoi in Greek.
Mosaic artist is called museiarius or musivarus. Pavimentarius is the one who uses marble to pave
the mosaics (Üstüner, 2002: 7). The middle mosaic is called Emblema. Mosaics are generally
divided into two types as floor and wall mosaics. Because the walls are easily damaged, the floor
mosaics survived more than the wall mosaics.
K1,
K4,
K3,
K5,
K10

Participants explained mosaic types and characteristics as follows:
Mosaics have different types based on the qualities of the stone pieces and method applied.
According to the technical classification, mosaics are divided into two types as wall (MusivumPous)
and floor (Opus Tessellatum or Pavimentum). Many other types emerged under different names in
different regions due to techniques developed in time and changing tastes.
Opus Vermiculatum and Opus Signinum are two of them. In time the neatly cut small and colorful
marble, stone, ceramic or cube-shaped tesseras made from glass paste took pebble stones place in
Opus Tessellatum floors. The size and shape of the tesseras are more or less the same. During the
early periods of this technique, the tesseras are used in geometric arrangements.

Participants stated that they use Ödekan’s studies while explaining mosaic laying techniques. According
to Ödekan, mosaic construction stages are as follows:
K2, 1. First, the widest borders of the mosaic on the floor or wall are determined. Outer contour lines like
K3, this are seen on the brick walls of the Hagios Georgios Church’s dome (Ödekan, 1997: 1300).
K7, 2. After determining the outer contours, a layer of plaster on which the mosaic pieces (tessera) will be
K8 applied on is prepared.
3. The wall surface is plastered with a mixture of tar to prevent the plaster layers fall down from
because of moisture.
4. For the plaster layer of the mosaic not to fall, head nails are nailed between the bricks leaving the
heads out (Mozaik-sanat.html.).
5. Pebbles and glass pieces are applied on the material generally made from cement. Plaster is applied
between the glued pieces. Pieces in different kinds, shapes and sizes like ceramic, metal, wood and
glass can be used together as mosaic pieces. The participants stated that materials used in Zeugma
80

museum were mainly procured from the colorful pebble stones along the banks of the Euphrates. The
colors that were not found along the Euphrates were procured from glass materials

Participants gave the following answer to the question of “Where were the mosaics first made?
According to Üstüner; The pioneers of mosaics were seen in the Sumerian and Egyptian art until the
4th Millennium BC in Mesopotamia. From the Greek classical age, mosaics were seen in Anatolia
and Greece and finally at the beginning of 2nd century BC mosaics were began to be seen in every
province in the East and the West. After the Roman Empire, mosaic art developed inside the Iranian
and Byzantium lands. These influences developed during the Byzantium art periods and transferred
K2,
to Renaissance. Christian Victor expressed that there is a similarity between ceramic art, wall
K3
mosaics and other art techniques in Mesopotamia and textile art of that time. It is believed that
mosaic art took inspiration from textile art because of the motif similarities (Üstüner, 2002). Mosaic
Construction: When the mosaic art which is the art of decorating walls and floors by lining
different colored small stones, marbles or glass pieces on a surface, is examined in terms of
technique, it was determined that there is a standard construction technique (Hasol, 2000: 404).
The participants gave the following answers to the questions about where the mosaics are mostly used
and how information about daily lives are learned from the mosaics:
We know that mosaics are mostly used on city pavements, courtyards of houses and bottoms of pools.
We learn about the city’s daily life mostly from the mosaics and one hundred thousand seals found in
the city of Zeugma. Ancient city of Zeugma is situated on the key transit route of Silk Road going from
capital of The Roman Empire, Rome, to capital of China, Shanghai and it is located inside the Persian
borders. Roman soldiers provided city’s and roads’ security. It is understood that this improved the
K6, trade in the city and increased quality of life. Having the images of gods and goddesses of like Tyke,
K5, Fortuna and Hermes reinforces this interpretation. Tyke governed the fortune and prosperity of a city.
K1, Fortuna was the goddess of fortune. Hermes was the god of commerce. On the highest hill of the
K2
ancient city of Belkis, on the other bank of the Euphrates, there is a Tykhe temple for the goddess
Tykhe. This temple was also portrayed on the back face of the city coins. Because the majestic temple
was seen by the caravans from tens of kilometers away, it is believed to make traders and passengers
feel safe. On the other hand, deployment of the 4. Legion camp with its 5 thousand soldiers in Zeugma
increased this feeling of being safe. It also strengthens the city economically and increased the postal
communication. More than ten thousand seals had the image of Augustus on them. This shows that
official documents were mostly military documents. Zeugma literally meant Gateway Bridge. From its
name, it is understood that Zeugma was the customs gate from east to west at that period.
Participants provided the following response to the question of “What are the characteristics that made
mosaics different from each other?
K2,
K5,
K7,
K8,
K1,
K4,
K10

1. A rug’s quality is determined by knots per square inch and the colors of the strands used. This is
true for the mosaics. There are floor mosaics similar to rug motifs. As the stones, teserras, used in the
mosaic get smaller, the beauty of the image increases. For example, in Zeugma the mosaic masters
used 400 thin pebble stones (teserra) to portray the feelings of a person’s face. While stones in 3-5
different colors were used in other mosaics, this number is 12-13 in Zeugma mosaics. Artists using
variety of color shades added a different depth to the mosaics. It is remarkable that many of the artists
signed their works just like today’s painters. This indicates the existence of mosaic workshops and
schools in the region. Frequently portrayed in Zeugma mosaics, Oceanus and Tethys were rarely used
in Greek mythology.
2. Because Zeugma was founded on the bank of the Euphrates and because it was close to the
Mediterranean, they gave special importance to water gods and goddesses. It is known that Oceanus
and Tethys were not portrayed in full body in mosaics found in European museums. Oceanus and
Tethys figures were portrayed in full body or in the form of bust in Zeugma mosaics. This can be
evaluated as the proof to the respect they had in this geography.
3. On the other hand, it is seen that Zeugma mosaic artists used “perspective” at least one thousand
years earlier than the Renaissance artists. It is possible that Renaissance artists learned perspective,
different color transitions and giving depth to the image from the mosaic artists that were brought
from the East to the West.
81

4. Because Zeugma was founded on the bank of the Euphrates and because it was close to the
Mediterranean, water god and goddess were frequently portrayed in the mosaics. One of the mosaics
portrays Oceanus and Tethys in the water and the visit of Hera to Tethys and Oceanus, described as
the father of gods in Homer’s Iliad. In Homer’s book, Odyssey, Odysseus comes to the shores of
Oceanus to go to land of the dead. On the other hand, it is told that Herakles needs to pass Oceanus to
reach the land of Hesperides and for this reason asks for a golden bowl from Helios. Also included in
the mythological narratives of Ovidius’s Metamorphosis, Oceanus and Tethys comfort Hera who was
cheated on by Zeus with Kallistro. This is depicted in Zeugma mosaics.
5. It is understood that mythological stories of ancient gods and goddesses were systematically
depicted in Zeugma mosaics in a magnificent way. A similar situation exists in the early Christian
churches in Cappadocia, Turkey. Bible stories were depicted in the frescoes of the churches’ walls and
ceilings in Cappadocia. Every single page of Bible and subjects in the Bible were depicted on the
ancient churches’ ceilings and walls. The new religion was taught the easy way to the Anatolian
people who did not know Hebrew just like narrating with Barco-vision
K1
K2
K3
K4
K5
K6
K7
K8
K9
K10

The participants summarized their views on the city of Gaziantep as follows:
Because Just like Zeugma, Gaziantep is founded on the historical Silk Road along the bank of the
Euphrates and is located on the intersection of Mediterranean lands and Mesopotamian lands where
the civilizations were born, it brought the past’s historical, cultural, artistic and hosting traditions to
today. It has an important place in trade and industry, especially in agriculture. Because of the recent
touristic activities in recent years, it began to be famous in gastronomy.
With Geographical Indication, baklava is registered with Gaziantep’s name. In the year 2015,
UNESCO announced Gaziantep as World Gastronomy center with its 300 different food.
Gaziantep is an important touristic city not only its Zeugma Museum but also with its castle,
archeology museum, open-air museums, historical bazaar and streets. Therefore, tour guides told that
they frequently take domestic and foreign tour groups to Gaziantep and Zeugma museum and to be
able to guide them in these places they need a historical and cultural accumulation and they are very
happy to use their skills while guiding the visitors. They stated that groups and agencies that come
with themselves are also very satisfied from the museum and the city.

Participants gave the following answers to the question of “Do you observe a change in the visitors after
you narrate about Zeugma and Gaziantep city? What are these changes?”
Of course, there are a lot of changes. Because the Southeastern Anatolian Region is less developed,
K1
because there are not enough information and because the region is close to the Middle Eastern
K2
countries, there is a question mark and prejudice inside the visitors’ minds. But they relax when they
learn about the city’s history and today’s life style, the bustle of the bazaars, the taste of their food.
K3
They want to taste Gaziantep food, buy dried eggplants, menengiç coffee and regular eggplants and
K4
see the bazaar with pearl inlaid tables, coppersmiths and jewelers. We tell them that the local people
K5
enjoy food, drinking, walking around and they drink tea and coffee at the famous Tahmis Coffeehouse.
When they hear about these, they want to drink coffee made traditionally over ash and cinder and chat
K6
and observe the local people. They want to drink the traditional natural mulberry syrup sold by the
K7
street vendor just like the locals. We have difficulty in bringing them to the hotel from the streets. They
don’t want to leave the streets; they say they wish they could have stayed a little bit more.
K8
K9
K10

All the participants gave the following answer to the question of “What are your recommendations
about tourist guides’ interpretation skills?”
We know that tourist guide candidates studying at the departments of Tourism Guidance in Turkish
K1
tourism faculties and other candidates take really good courses. To graduate, they have to participate
in a 45 days of Turkey tour and they need to get at least 75 from foreign language exam. We
K2
recommend them to give importance to their course starting from the first year, to read books on
K3
history and culture in addition to their classes and enrich their knowledge.
82

K4
K5
K6
K7
K8
K9
K10

In addition to being rich in its geography, Turkey is a rich country in terms of historical and cultural
sources. If the guide candidates cannot understand these richness people have produced and
bequeathed to today and if they cannot find the relation between them, their interpretation skills will
not improve.
For them to improve their interpretation skills, they need to (a) read a lot, (b) establish connections
between different histories and different faiths, (c) participate in trips to regions rich in faith and
culture, (d) benefit from the experiences of guides who have worked in the cultural region they will go
to, (e) to guide different groups, particularly culture groups, in these cultural regions, (f) note the
interesting questions the visitors ask, (g) get help from experts in areas they lack to better themselves,
(h) learn about the local people’s traditions, life styles, eating habits and how they approach
foreigners by staying with them for a while to get to know today’s local culture through observation
and experiencing, (j) be keen on liking and preserving the local culture, (k) know the visitors’ culture
really good and to establish connections between their culture and their destinations and to narrate
these to the visitors.
In short, interpretation skills develop in time by traveling, observing, experiencing, asking, learning
and sharing with the visitors. Interpretation needs certain stages. Just like Rumi’s famous words “I
was raw, I became cooked, I was burnt”, it needs effort and process transitioning from apprenticeship
to professionalism. The process can be long or short.
We recommend our students to work in the summers in travel agencies organizing package tours
starting from the first year and get experience under the guidance of professional guides.
We are aware that the financial resources of our students and educational institutions are limited. We
are aware that many of our students have difficulty in participating in Turkey tours and some of them
cannot even participate at all. This is a problem. We believe that the tourism sector and the Ministry
should provide financial support to these guide candidates who will become promotional ambassadors
of our country and who will become cultural mediators.

Professional Turkish guides’ interpretations about the subject coincide with Yu and others’
interpretations. According to Yu and others, sufficient funding must be allocated to tourism and tour
guide associations and tourism training authorities to facilitate training and basic entry-level jobs should
be provided as well as advanced guide training for tour guides. Also, there should be respect to guides’
cultural mediator roles for good guiding. Tourism industry should support professional development, on
the job training and offer better remuneration and rewards for good practice for tour guides.
4. DISCUSSION and CONCLUSIONS
The participants stated that they are very well informed about Zeugma Mosaic Museum and the
artifacts inside the museum and they could lengthen and shorten their interpretations depending on the
tour group’s interest. Also, they mentioned that special culture groups stay inside the museum longer
and they can walk around longer without hurrying. They take pictures of the mosaics and listen to the
interpretations of them more carefully. They told that these cultural tours are more satisfying for the
tourists and for the guides because they can interpret the history and stories back ground of the mosaics
in the museum more comprehensively and in a fun way. On the other hand, the agencies put lots of
places to visit especially in the domestic package tours. They have difficulty in giving information and
making interpretations in places like the zeugma Museum where special time must be allocated. They
drew attention to the fact that travel time should be longer in this kind of special places. Despite the
external factors limiting their performances, their agencies receive positive feedback from archeologist,
art historians, mythologists, architects and other people who are familiar with the subject and who
participate in their tours. This pleases them and the agency they work for. Participants interpreted the
role of mosaics shown in zeugma in bringing history’s cultural accumulation to today.
It can be said that tourist guides’ interpretation skills are effective in teaching the visitors the local
culture, the creation of cultural places, how objects were used and what purposes they served, their
reflections on today and connections between the past and today’s local culture. As in Zeugma Museum
and Gaziantep example, when the tourist guides narrates the right information in the right place and in a
way that the visitors understand, visitors get more interested in the city and the products produces in the
city. Guide’s interpretation skill contributes to the visitor’s learning, experiencing and entertainment
83

trends. Their demands to drink mulberry syrup in the street and to drink coffee and chat at Tahmis
Coffee House can be given as examples to this. When the tourist guide knows well the functions of the
historical places they visit and the local culture if the tourist guides give this information accurately to
the visitors. So visitors develop positive feelings towards local culture and they want to get to know the
local people and local life. Tourist guide’s intercultural mediator role is effective in visitors’ attitudes.
Tourist guide candidates studying at the departments of tourist guidance in Turkey’s tourism faculties
are required to attend the 45-day General Turkey tour organized by the Association of Tourist Guides in
Turkey (TUREB). However, many students who do not have the means have difficulty in attending
these costly trips. For this reason, financial contributions of Ministry of Culture and Tourism and other
stakeholders in the tourism sector will help overcome these problems. On the other hand, using third
and fourth year students who know foreign languages and who can represent their country in domestic
and foreign expos can be more effective in Turkey’s promotion.
REFERENCES
Abacı O., Alakuş O. A., Gökay, M., Macccario, N.K., Tuna S. (2005). İlköğretim Sanat Eğitimi Kuramları
ve Yöntemleri, Görsel Sanatlar Eğitimi Derneği Yayınları 3.Varan Matbaacılık, ISBN 975-00345-11.Altaylı.
Ahipaşaoğlu, S., (2001). Seyahat İşletmelerinde Tur Planlaması ve Yönetimi. Ankara: Detay Yayıncılık.s.91.
Altın, B. N., Oruç, S. (2007). Tarih ve Coğrafya Eğitiminde Müze Eğitimi ve Yaratıcı Drama, I. Ulusal
İlköğretim Kongresi, Hacettepe Üniversitesi, Ankara: 15-17 Kasım 2007.
Ashley, S. (2005). State Authority and the Public Sphere: Ideas on the Changing Role of the Museum as a
Canadian Social Institution, Museum and Society, 3 (1), pp. 5-17.
Ap, J. and Kevin, K. and Wong, F. (2001). Case Study on Tour Guiding: Professionalism, Issues and
Problems, Tourism Management, 22, 551.
Atagök, T. (1982). Çağdaş Müzecilik Kavramı Doğrultusunda Türk Sanat Müzelerinin Kültürel
Etkinliklerinin Saptanması, Yeterlilik Tezi, Mimar Sinan Üniv., İstanbul, s.67. AyantabDergisi;
Zeugma’nın Kronolojik Tarihi, Sayı 4.
Ballantyne, R.,Packer, J. and Falk, J. (2011). “Visitiors‟ Learning for Environmental Sustainability: Testing
Short and Long Term Impacts of Wildlife Tourism Experinces Using Structural Equation Modelling”,
Tourism Management, 32(4): 770-779.
Buyurgan, S., Mercin, L. ve Özsoy V. (Ed)., (2005). Görsel Sanatlar Eğitiminde Müze Eğitimi ve
Uygulamaları. Ankara: Görsel Sanatlar Eğitimi Derneği Yayınları.
Chapstick, B. (1985). Museums and Tourism, The lnternational Journal of Museum Management and
Curatorship (1985), 4. 365-3 72.
Christian, V. (1940). Altertumsk un des Zweist Romlandes, Cilt 1,s. 137.
Cohen, E. (1985). The Tourist Guide: The Origins, Structure and Dynamics of a Role, Annals of Tourism
Research, 12(1): 5-29.
Çetin, G., ve Kızılırmak, İ., Eraslan Şehnaz, (2012). Antik Dönem Sanatında Okeanos Figürleri, Atatürk
Üniversitesi, Güzel Sanatlar Fakültesi, SanatDergisi, sayı 22, sayfa.157.
Ergeç, R. (2000). Belkıs/Zeugma 1992-1999/2000; Çalışmaları, Kazı ve Araştırmalar. Arkeoloji ve Sanat
Dergisi, No: 98. s. 20-29. İstanbul.
Fennell, D. A. and Malloy, F. (1996). Measuring the Ethical Nature of Tourism Operators, Annals of
TourismResearch, 26(4): 928-943.
Genç, Ö. (1992). Rehberlik Eğitimine Eleştirel Bir Yaklaşım, Turizm Eğitimi Konferansı, Bildiriler Kitabı,
Turizm Bakanlığı Turizm Eğitim Genel Müdürlüğü, Ankara, 215-217.
Grant, M., C. (2005). Enhancing Motivation Using The Constructs of Flow in Museum Education Activities.
San Diego Üniversity, Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.
Gray, D. & Chadwick, A. (2001), Museums: Using Key Workers to Deliver Lifelong Learning. International
Review of Education, 47, 5, 427–441.
Grimal, P. (1997). Mitoloji Sözlüğü. Yunan ve Roma, İstanbul.
Güzel, F.Ö. ve Köroğlu, Ö., (2013). “Turistlerin Milliyet Bazında Davranış Kalıplarının ve Karakteristik
Özelliklerinin Belirlenmesi: Turist Rehberleri Üzerinde Bir Araştırma”, 14.Ulusal Turizm Kongresi,
“Turizmde Yenilik”, Erciyes Üniversitesi, Bildiriler Kitabı 6-9 Aralık, ISBN : 978-605-5216-74-0,
Kasım 2013, s.449-473, Kayseri.
84

Ham, S. H. &Weiler, B. (2002). Interpretation as the Centrepiece of Sustainable Wild Life Tourism. Chapter
3 in Harris,R.,Griffin,T. & Williams, P (eds.). Sustainable Tourism: A Global Perspective. London:
Butterworth-Heinneman, 35-44.
Ham, S. (1992) Environmental Interpretation: A Practical Guide for People with Big Ideas and Small
Budgets. Golden, Colorado: North America Press.
Holbrook, M. B. and Hirschman, E.C. (1982).The Experiential Aspects of Consumption: Consumer
Fantasies., Feelings and Fun. Journal of Consumer Research, 9, pp.132-140.
Hughes, C., Jackson, A. &Kidd, J., (2007). The Role of Theater in Museums and Historic Sites: Visitors,
Audiences, and Learners. International Handbook of Research in Arts Education. Ed: Liora Bresler,
Dordrecht: Springer.
Karaçal, G. ve Demirtaş N. (2002). 4702 Sayılı Yasa Uygulamalarının Turizm Rehberliği Eğitimine Etkisi.
Turizm Eğitimi Konferansı, Workshop Bildiriler Kitabı, Turizm Bakanlığı, Ankara.
Keskin, F. (1999). Sivil Toplum Kuruluşlarında Etik. İçinde Etik – Deprem İşliği Konuşmaları, Sivil Tolum
Kuruluşları ve Etik, 1-2 Temmuz, 1999, (ss.120-125). İstanbul: Türkiye Ekonomik ve Toplumsal
TarihVakfı.
Kuçuradi, İ. (1999). Etik ve Etikler.İçinde Etik-Deprem İşliği Konuşmaları, Sivil Toplum Kuruluşları ve
Yasalar-Etik-Deprem,1-2 Temmuz, 1999, (ss.115-120). İstanbul: Türkiye Ekonomik ve Toplumsal Tarih
Vakfı.
Lasalle, D. and Brıtton, T. A. (2003). Priceless: Turning Ordinary Products into Extraordinary Experiences,
Harvard Business School Press, USA.
Leclerc, D. and Judith N. Martin. (2004), Tour Guide Communication Competence: French, German and
American Tourists’ Perceptions. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 28 (3-4), 181-200.
Littlefair, C. and Buckley, R. (2008). “Interpretation Reduces Ecological Impacts of Visitors to World
Heritage Site”,
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Ambio Vol. 37, No. 5, July, s.338
http://www.ambio.kva.se.
Moscardo, G., Woods, B. and Saltzer R. (2004) The role of Interpretation in Wild Lifetourism. Chapter 12 in
K. Higginbottom (ed.) Wildlife Tourism: Impacts, Planning and Management. London: Common Ground.
Moscardo, G. (1999). Making Visitors Mindful: Principles for Creating Sustainable Visitor Experiences
Through Effective Communication. Champaign, IL: Sagamore. O’Sullıvan, E.L. ve Spangler, K.J. (1998).
Experience Marketing, Venture Publishing Inc., USA.p.8.
Moscardo, G. (1996). Mindful Visitors. Annals of Tourism Research 23 (2), 376–87.
Oruç S., Altın N. (2008). Müze Eğitimi ve Yaratıcı Drama, Çukurova Üniversitesi, Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi,
3(35); 125-141.
Poudel, S., Nyaupane, P.,G. ( 2013). The Role of Interpretative Tour Guiding in Sustainable Destination
Management: A Comparison and Mediation between Guided and Nonguided Tourists, Tour Guides.
Journal of Travel Research, XX (X) 1-4, SAGE Publications, Published online 27 Fabruary 2013
DOI:101177/0047287513478496, p.10.
Penz, E., Hogg, M.K. (2011). The Role of Mixed Emotions in Consumer Behaviour, European Journal of
Marketing, 45(1/2): 104-132.
Reisinger, Y., and Steiner, C., (2006). Reconceptualising Interpretation: The Role of Tour Guides in
Authentic Tourism. Current Issues in Tourism, DOI:10.2167/cit280.0, Vol. 9, No. 6, pp.486.
Resmi Gazete; Turist Rehberliği Meslek Yönetmeliği, Sayfa : 82 Resmî Gazete 26 Aralık 2014 – Sayı :
29217.
Rabley, J. P. (2005). Displacement: The Impact of Forced Removal on Memory Reconstruction at the
District Six Museum and Beyond. Columbia University, Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.
Reisinger,Y., Steiner, C. (2006). Reconceptualising Interpretation: The Role of Tour Guides in Authentic
Tourism. Current Issues in Tourism, Vol. 9, No. 6, 1466-4208/06/06 0481-18.
Thompson DT. (1993). Considering the Museum Visitor: an Interactional Approach to Environmental
Design: Visitor Immersion. Phd. Dissertation, The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Sanat Dergisi,
Sayı 22/157.
Tosun, C. ve R.Temizkan.; (2004). Türkiye’nin Dış Tanıtım ve Ülke İmajında Turist Rehberlerinin Rolü. I.
Balıkesir Ulusal Turizm Kongresi, (15-16 Nisan) Bildiriler Kitabı, 345-365.
Turist Rehberliği Meslek Kanunu. (2012). 22/6/2012 Tarih ve 28331 Sayılı Resmi Gazetede Yayımlanan
6326 Sayılı Turist Rehberliği Meslek Kanunu.
Türkiye Turist Rehberliği Birliği (2004). Resmî Gazete, Sayı : 29217 Turist Rehberliği Yönetmeliği, Meslek
85

Etik İlkeleri, Madde 30, (1-e).26 Aralık 2014, Cuma. www.tureb.org.tr/
URL:http://www.unutulmussanatlar.com/2012/07/mozaik-sanat.html 16.10.2014.
URL:http://www.zeugmaweb.com, (2016)/zeugma/onem.htm.8.5.2016.
URL:http://www.myk.gov.tr.10 Kasım 2013.
URL:http://www.wftga.org/tourist-guiding/what-tourist-guide.World Federation Tourist Guide Associations.
Tourist Guiding, What is a Tourist Guide (24.5.2016).
Üstüner Ali C. (2002). Mozaik Sanatı, Engin Yayıncılık, Sanat Kitapları Dizisi, ISBN 975-379-333-2, s. 9,
İstanbul.
Weiler, B.,and S. H. Ham. (2001). Tour Guides and Interpretation.In Encyclopedia of Ecotourism, edited by
David B., Weaver. Wallingford, UK: CABI, pp. 549-63.
Yarcan, Ş. (2007). Profesyonel Turist Rehberliğinde Mesleki Etik Üzerine Kavramsal Bir Değerlendirme,
Anatolia: Turizm Araştırmaları Dergisi, Cilt 18, Sayı 1, Bahar: 33-44.
Yağız, D. (2006). Tale of Zeugma and the Birecik Project, Art and Cultural Heritage, Law, Policy and
Practice, edited by Barbara T. Hoffman, Cambridge University Press,New York, USA.
Yıldırım, A., Şimşek, H. (2013). Sosyal Bilimlerde Araştırma Yöntemleri, Seçkin Yayıncılık, 9.
Genişletilmiş Baskı, ISBN: 978-975-02-2603-8, Sertifika No:13268, ss:80-81, Ankara.
Yu., Xin; Weiler B.,and Ham, S., (2004). “Cultural Mediation in Guided Tour Experiences: A Case Study of
Australian Guides of Chinese Tour Group, Monash University, Business and Economics, Department of
Management Working Paper Series, ISSBN: 1327-5216, p.7.
Yu.,Xin; Weiler., B.,and Ham, S., (2001). Intercultural Communication: A Framework for Analysing
Intercultural Competence of Chinese. Journal of Vocation Marketing 8 (1), pp., 7587.
Zengin, B., Batman, O. ve Yıldırgan, R. (2004), “Seyahat Acentalarının Turist Rehberlerinden Beklentilerine
Yönelik Bir Araştırma”, I. Balıkesir Ulusal Turizm Kongresi, Bildiriler Kitabı, 366-376.
Research Participants
N
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P 10

Name&Surname
SemraAltın
Tijen Oral
Hamide Çakır
Evren Özdemir
Atilla Nilgün
Burhan Çınar
Uysal Yenipınar
Güney Peker
Lale Yılmaz
İsa Akdağ

Age
44
41
30
40
49
27
54
31
32
43

Occupation, Association of Tourist Guiding
Professional Tourist Guide, İzmir-Fabruary, 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, İzmir, March- 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, Nevşehir, March - 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, İzmir, Fabruary, 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, Antalya, March 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, İstanbul, March, 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, İzmir, March, 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, İstanbul March, 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, İstanbul April, 2016
Professional Tourist Guide, Adana, April, 2016

86

