Cultural Heritage of Delos. To what extend Delos
can develop its product as a cultural related
destination.

John Arnaoutis
SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS, BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL STUDIES
A dissertation submitted for the degree of
Master of Science (MSc) in Hospitality and Tourism Management

Thessaloniki - Greece
2018

Student Name:

John Arnaoutis

SID:

1109160028

Supervisor:

Dr. Mavragani

I hereby declare that the work submitted is mine and that where I have made use of
another’s work, I have attributed the source(s) according to the Regulations set in the
Student’s Handbook.

2

Abstract
This dissertation is written as part of the MSc in Hospitality and Tourism Management
at the International Hellenic University.
This dissertation explores the aspects of cultural heritage of Delos and to what extend
can Delos develop into a major cultural destination. As an important and authentic
archeological site, protected by UNESCO since 1990, Delos can take advantage of its
rich archeological findings to develop its cultural product, add value and increase
revenues of local community.
First of all, the current situation is analyzed from every aspect based on literature
review. Cultural heritage tourism is a niche tourism market that many destinations
across the world are trying to attract. An adequate number of researchers have tried to
reach the issue of development cultural tourism. Greece has always been known for its
unique culture that is well preserved and inspired future generations all over the world.
Cultural heritage has been a tool for sustainable tourism development especially in
isolated areas.
In the second part of the dissertation, there is an analysis of the primary research
conducted on the spot. The questionnaires evaluate the current situation and the
visitor’s perspective for experience. This complex evaluation helped to extract vital
conclusions for the site. The objectives are: to evaluate every aspect of the site from a
visitor’s point of view and segment the visitors from their personal characteristics.
Finally, this dissertation aims to indicative the benefits of cultural development, how
fruitful can it be for a destination and to understand the consumer behaviors within
Delos island.
John Arnaoutis
15/01/2019
Keywords: Cultural Heritage, cultural development, Delos, archeology, cultural tourism.

3

Acknowledgements
This dissertation was the biggest challenge for my master’s degree and I wouldn’t be
able to complete it without the constant help and support of some people.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Mavragani Eleni, who believe in me
and was always available for any questions or inquiries regarding my dissertation. Her
guidance and support were crucial for my dissertation and without her collaboration, I
couldn’t make it happen.
Furthermore, I owe some gratitude to all the tourists that took some time to fill my
questionnaire and express their opinion about the archeological site.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and Fani who were constantly by my side to
support me. They always encourage me and helped to accomplish my task.

Thank you all.

4

Table of Contents
Abstract .......................................................................................................................... 3
Acknowledgements........................................................................................................ 4
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................... 6
2. Literature Review. ...................................................................................................... 7
2.1. Cultural Heritage. ................................................................................................ 7
2.2. Cultural Heritage Tourist ..................................................................................... 8
2.2.1. Cultural tourists’ motivation ....................................................................... 11
2.3.1. The Factor of Authenticity ............................................................................. 11
2.3.2 Forms of authenticity. .................................................................................. 12
2.4.1. Cultural Heritage Economics .......................................................................... 12
2.4.2. Admission fee debate .................................................................................. 13
2.5.1. Local community. ........................................................................................... 15
2.5.2. Benefits of Cultural tourism. ....................................................................... 15
2.5.3. Sustainable development in a cultural project ........................................... 16
3. Delos......................................................................................................................... 17
3.1. Introduction to Delos ........................................................................................ 17
3.2. Brief History....................................................................................................... 18
3.3. Authenticity and integrity. ................................................................................ 19
3.4. Problems and difficulties. .................................................................................. 21
3.5. Statistics about the site ..................................................................................... 23
4. Methodology ............................................................................................................ 25
5.Descriptive Statistics ................................................................................................. 27
5.2. Inductive Statistics ........................................................................................ 37
5.3. Results ........................................................................................................... 39
6. Discussion................................................................................................................. 39
7. Conclusions and recommendations......................................................................... 42
8. References ............................................................................................................... 45
9. Appendix .................................................................................................................. 48
Appendix 1 ................................................................................................................... 48
Appendix 2 ................................................................................................................... 51

5

1. Introduction
Travel and Tourism currently accounts for over 10% of the world’s GDP, and
approximately 1 in 10 of all jobs. With the cost of air traveling constantly declining
and the growth in the number of middle incomes ‘new travelling’ households set to
rise rapidly, the sector is set for sustained growth, outstripping many of the world's
major economies. In the next decade, the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC)
forecasts show that Travel & Tourism’s direct contribution to GDP is expected to
grow at an average of 3.8% per year. As a result, the sector will contribute an
average 9 million new jobs per year, providing secure livelihoods for communities
across the globe. (WTTC, 2018) These facts depict how important is the tourism
industry for global economy.
Europe has always been an important destination for those attracted by its rich
cultural and historic legacy. The availability of museums, exhibitions archeological
sites and other cultural dentations for public consumption helped to boost tourism.
Specifically, Greece has always been known for its authentic and unique cultural
heritage. UNESCO has currently listed 18 Greek sites as world Heritage, 16 of these
sites are inscribed based on “cultural” criteria and 2 more based on “cultural” and
“natural” criteria. These numbers indicate how important is cultural heritage of
Greece for global heritage.
The topic of this dissertation is of major importance because for various cultural
heritage destinations along Greece, since it tries to examine how an isolated, tiny
island but with great heritage can be turned into a major cultural heritage

6

destination. This plan requires the contributes of DMOs, Greek Tourism Ministry
(GTP), local community travel agencies, tour operators and many other beneficiaries.
The literature review of this dissertation contain theories of researchers about
cultural heritage as a concept and how archeological sites can turned into profitable
projects. Research on this matter is wide, so the review will focus on the most
important and up-to-date opinions. Regarding the methodology, primary and
quantitate research held on the spot, to evaluate on a large scale the opinion and
the experiences of visitors. Data analysis will show and analyze the results of the
questionnaires. Finally, discussions over the matter, conclusions and
recommendations about Delos will occur.
Recommendations and conclusions on this matter are expected to assist planning
and create a proper strategy on the Destination. With proper planning, Delos can
utilize its cultural to turn into a major cultural heritage destination.

2. Literature Review.
2.1. Cultural Heritage.
Cultural Heritage is an expression of the ways of living developed by a community
and passed on from generation to generation, including customs practices, places,
objects, artistic expressions and values (ICOMOS, 2002). This Heritage can be
tangible (sculptures, buildings, paintings) or intangible (Music, customs). Greece is
blessed to have rich cultural heritage that it doesn’t stop to monuments and
collections of objects it passes from one generation to another. The fact that Greece
has more archeological museums than any other country in the world shows the
wealth of Greece in archeological exhibits (MFA.gr). The Greek culture counts 5,000
years of history and has benefited the humanity in a wide range of artistic political
and scientific evolution over the years.
It is fundamental to refer to the contribution of Greek to culture to world cultural
Heritage. Greeks contributed in language, Mythology, poetry, philosophy, Political
systems/ Democracy, Sciences, Architecture, Sculpture, Theatre, Olympic Games,
Modern Literature, Greek Diet. Moreover, a great number of archeological findings
are remaining in good shape until today. As a result, visitors that are familiar with
7

Greek culture, have a unique opportunity to relive the past and understand the life
and customs of our ancestors by visiting Greece.
Greek Heritage is often the re-creation of the selective past, those aspects that local
community values as part of their legacy, wants to remember and feels proud about
them. Furthermore, this iconic Heritage creates an opportunity for tourism
development within Greece.
The Hellenic Ministry of culture is responsible for research regarding cultural
heritage in Greece at a national level. For archeological sites and findings regional
ephorate of antiquities is responsible for research preservation and conservation of
cultural heritage.

Image 1: Source: Cultural Tourism Sites Management-A Training Manual for Trainers in the Greater
Mekong Subregion, 2008

2.2. Cultural Heritage Tourist
The characteristics of tourists are important factors when the researcher analyzes
satisfaction with cultural heritage destinations (Huh, Uysal, McCleary 2008).
Therefore, demographic, socioeconomic, and behavioral indicators are generally
8

used in tourism research to profile tourists by age, gender, income, marital status,
occupations, and education or ethnic background (Yavuz, 1994). Moreover, the
importance of cultural tourism could be the main reason that someone chooses a
destination, but it can also be secondary reason. In some cases, it might be a
secondary role to visit but in others it might play not discernible in destination
choice, even though the tourist will participate in cultural tourism activities while onsite. Richards (2001) argues that cultural tourism is not just about visiting sites and
monuments which has tend to be ‘traditional’ view of cultural tourism but is also
involved consuming the way of life of the areas visited, so cultural tourists nowadays
have a holistic approach of the cultural product and they can deeply understand its
aspects.
A cultural tourist is defined as someone who visits or intendents to visit a cultural
tourism attraction art gallery, museum or historical site, attend a performance or a
festival or participate in a wide range of cultural activities in anytime during their
trip, regardless the main reason of travelling (McKercher 2000). This definition
creates a wide base of travelers that could be considered as cultural tourist.
Based on Girard and Nijkamp (2009), cultural heritage tourists divided into two types
that arising from mass tourism, generally characterized as high-volume/low-yield,
and that arising from the niche market of cultural tourism, which by contrast is
regarded as being low-volume/high-yield. Hence, there are important differences
between these two types of visitors as mass tourism is thought to be culturally
insensitive, on the other hand cultural tourists are considered to be informed, welleducated and aware of the cultural values their presence affects. Also, Silberberg
(1995) identified the cultural/heritage tourist as one that earns more money than
the average and spends more money while on vacation; spends more time in an area
while on vacation; is more highly educated than the general public. Conclusively,
cultural tourism leads to economic, social, cultural impacts on the host community,
but it is highly important for policy makers and stakeholders to be aware for the
personal characteristics of visitors, so they can adjust their planning accordingly.

9

VISITOR’S CHARACTERISTICS

GENERAL

SITAUATION-SPECIFIC

Demographic, geographic and
socio-economic factors
OBJECTIVE
• Employment
MEASURES
• Education
• Income
• Home location
• Family age

Previous Travel patterns
• Place
• Type of transportation
• Number of people
• Length of stay
• Expenditure patterns
• Type of accommodation
• Activity patterns
Characteristic visitor lifestyles
Preferences and attitudes towards
a particular destination, site or
• Motivations
INFERRED
product.
• Expectations
MEASURES
• Likelihood of future travel to
• Preferred heritage
a destination
experiences
•
Attitudes towards a
• Philosophy and approach to
destination/product/site.
heritage and travel
• Activity preferences
• Desired personal benefits
• Location preferences
• Reaction to different kinds
• images
of heritage experiences
Table 1: Source: Characteristics of visitor market segments (Hall and McArthur, 1998)

10

2.2.1. Cultural tourists’ motivation
Motivation of cultural tourists is mainly knowledge: the pursuit of knowledge and
other personal benefits are important factors that motivate tourist to visit a cultural
heritage attraction (Chen 1998). The pursuit of knowledge and the general
willingness of exploration are distinctions between heritage tourists and other
categories. Learning about culture and nature is main motivation of cultural tourist
along with enriching personal knowledge and spending time in a constructive
activity.
Apart from that, Chen (1998) also discovered a second range of motivations which is
personal benefits. This category includes perceived health benefits, relaxation,
gaining spiritual reward, sightseeing and accompany friend and relatives in cultural
activities.
It is logical that different types of people seek for different types of cultural heritage
experience. For instance, deeply religious people are looking for sacred sites,
churches or even monasteries. Outdoor enthusiasts and archeology enthusiasts seek
for natural sites and archeological sites, respectively. As a matter of fact, the
diversity of cultural related sites creates a great number of cultural heritage tourists
segments.

2.3.1. The Factor of Authenticity
Tour operators and other travel service providers appear to agree that people seek
authentic experiences, as they started using terms like ‘real’, ‘authentic’ and
‘genuine’ excessively in their promotional literature and in their marketing
campaigns. However, tourists want authenticity in an extra scale, something that is
probably better than reality. Therefore, although many people desire an authentic
experience, animation and visualization may be more important than authenticity
(Wall 1989).
Authenticity has long been an issue in tourism. When tourists visit an area to
experience a unique culture, residents often actively attempt to present it as
authentic in order to attract tourists. This effort of locals to present a site as
authentic leads to staged authenticity, for example fake Greek weddings. Ritzer
(1996) believes that in its extreme form, this is the McDonaldization of culture:
11

efficiency, calculability, standardization, predictability, and control in product
delivery and consumer experience. In many cases, tourists seem to be unable to spot
the differences between staged heritage experiences and real heritage experiences.
2.3.2 Forms of authenticity.
Authenticity in heritage is complicated term derived by different factors. Bruner
(1994), established four forms of authenticity in heritage. First form is the ‘authentic
reproduction’. This form of authenticity is about convincing the visitors that the site
is original. Main task of the managers is to present it as an original site to public.
Second form of authenticity is when the site is complete, flawless replication with
the essential historical accuracy and based on scholar research. Third sense of
authenticity means original instead of copied. This implies that any alteration to the
original site turns it into inauthentic. Many sites, buildings and artifacts although
they are original, they are filled with others, to look complete. Finally, the fourth
meaning of authenticity depicts a site with authority and legal recognition, thus an
authorized site that represents a location with historic value.
2.4.1. Cultural Heritage Economics
Despite the value of cultural heritage and its great contribution to enjoyment,
education and appreciation of an attraction by visitors, the cost of conservation is
huge, due to environmental factors and gradually increased number of visitors every
year. Considering the enormous cost of preservation, decision-makers, attempt to
increase revenue. Even in public organizations revenues are vital for maintaining
historic areas. Apart from government funding and private sponsorships, heritage
sites, should raise money from they own resources (entrance fees, etc.) to operate
properly.
Especially for cultural heritage sites, there are various sources of revenue.

12

Government
funding

Private Hires

Guidebooks/
audio tours

Donations

sources
of
revenue

Events/
Festivals

Retail

Catering

Entrance Fees

Image 2: Source: After Stevens (1995).
2.4.2. Admission fee debate
The effort of cultural heritage sites to raise revenue led to the question whether the
public should have to pay for the experience of visiting its own heritage. On one side,
people argue that the cost for conservation and interpretation is so high that all
visitors have to contribute for the best possible result (Smith 1989).
Revenues from earnings can be used to conserve and protect the site. Also, through
the fees, the administration of the site can manage the demand, especially during
high season.
The earnings can contribute to improve the facilities, quality of the site and
customer service. As a result, visitor will be satisfied, and they might repeat their
visit. In addition, when visitors are required to pay an entrance, they respect the site
more and tend to be more focused on the exhibition. (Fyall and Garrod 1998)
By contrast, anti-payment activists argue that conservation and interpretation is for
the good of the people who in fact are part of this legacy. Therefore, they suggest
that they are not requiring to pay for something that is theirs.
They think that entrance fee may discourage some people to visit the site, especially
if the price is high. Also, putting a price in cultural heritage sites doesn’t fit with the
notion of heritage, it really is a commercial way of managing, unsuitable for heritage
13

site. These sites mostly focus in promoting culture, education and enjoyment. (Fyall
and Garrod 1998).
4.2.3. The effects of cultural development in a region
The effects of culture on the regional economy both in terms of generated revenues
and employment effects are truly important. Public investments in maintenance and
rehabilitation of cultural valuable buildings society receives great benefits, almost 10
times the initial investment (regjeringen.no 2005). Moreover, each workplace
directly attached to cultural heritage sector creates a significant amount of jobs. The
effects on investing in culture are diverse and vary by site, project and over time.
It is difficult to evaluate the impact of a project in cultural heritage because the
outcomes won’ t come in a short period of time. Apart from the multiply effect in
tourism industry is expected to generate income to a wide variety of professions.
Therefore, the effects of an investment in cultural heritage could be classified in
direct effects and indirect effects. (Bowitz & Ibenholt 2008).
1. Direct effects are usually measurable and can be the value added to a cultural
related organization, the increase of sales or the extras employees. Direct effects are
easier to evaluate and often are used to public debates to show the impacts of the
investment.
2. Indirect Effects.
1. Multiplier effect. Higher local revenues result in higher demand for goods from
the local market. Firms that can cover these needs, increase their sales.
2. Ancillary spending. Visitor attracted by the project are expected to spend money
on various services like restaurants, accommodation transportation etc. Thus, local
firms of these sectors are going to increase their revenues and hire more employees.
3. Gravitation effects. These effects occur in an area when an investment in cultural
heritage takes place and they are processes that attract more people to live and
establish firms in this area. These processes boost the entrepreneurship and
innovation, as a result they increase the average income and may lead to increase
employment in the future.
4. Cultural effects. Despite the economic effects, cultural project could lead to noneconomic effects in a local area. Such effect is strengthening the identity for
inhabitants.
14

2.5.1. Local community.
It is fundamental to understand that local community is part of the tourism product
and their problems, opinions, ideas and concerns should be considered and
addressed. By being part of a cultural project local residents are committed to the
project and hold their future in their hands by participating in the decision-making
procedure and the benefits of tourism development in their region. The fragmented
nature of the tourism industry creates an undeniable need of coordination and
collaboration in planning and many different stakeholders have interest in the
tourism planning process (Aas & al, 2005).
In regions where, cultural heritage tourism is developing, residents cope with many
problems and concerns regarding the tourists flows, economic sustainability or
environmental threats. Therefore, local residents should be involved in tourism
planning in order to express these concerns. As locals they should be the most
suitable people to indicate which artifacts should be used as tourism resources and
what threats are hidden. All stakeholders ought to be encouraged to participate in
heritage tourism development, in order to promote sustainable development in
every aspect. Active participation of the stakeholders in the decision making is
considered a multidirectional relation process where the decision-makers accept the
stakeholders’ capability of proposing public actions and practical interventions in the
territory.
Involving residents and other stakeholders in decision-making procedures is not easy
to accomplish, especially when there are conflicts between them, and various
interests are involved. Such efforts need funding, time and especially well-trained
managers, that can hear every side of the story and take the most fruitful decision
(Gill 1996). Stakeholders and local residents should be empowered and motivated to
understand what the best for them is.

2.5.2. Benefits of Cultural tourism.
Benefits are defined here as an improved condition or lessening of a worse condition
to individuals and communities. They can be categorized as personal (physical and
psychological), sociocultural, economic, and environmental. Apart from the
15

economic benefits, that are strongly promoted by managers and government
representatives, there are also sociocultural benefits derived from cultural heritage
tourism. Sociocultural benefits include learning, awareness, appreciation, family
bonding, community pride, a firmer sense of ethnic identity, increased
understanding and tolerance of others, and stronger cultural identity (Driver et al
1991). Benefits can be realized both by tourists who visit cultural areas and by host
communities. This interrelation fosters a cross-cultural communication that can
promote understanding between the host and guest (Mathieson & Wall 1984). For
example, residents are educated about the outside world without leaving their
homes, while their visitors significantly learn about a distinctive culture.
Another important factor of heritage tourism development is about local
entrepreneurship. By participating in cultural heritage projects local residents have
more opportunities to establish small-scale, locally owned businesses that support
local economy, minimize leakages and create a financially viable environment for
local people (Smith 1998). Through these small organizations, local residents create
strong bonds between the members of the society and a vital sustainable
development that allow people to gain expertise and economic benefits.

2.5.3. Sustainable development in a cultural project
Sustainable development would require a long-term perspective that worked
towards establishing equity between people and between people and other
inhabitants of the planet (ecological sustainability). Furthermore, it supported the
empowerment of people to be involved in the decisions that influence the quality of
their lives. Surely the sustenance of culture should be incorporated so that all the
stakeholders accept that all the initiatives taking place on the project are
economically viable, environmentally sensitive and culturally appropriate. (Girard
Nijkamp 2009) Sustainable development has been a main target of many countries
regarding cultural projects. Sustainable development in a tourism project implies
that the development simultaneously considers economic factors, environmental
and socio-cultural dimensions. Therefore, sustainability is a difficult task archive for
tourism projects, as factors are constantly change and so do the objectives of the
project.
16

Wall (1993), underlined what are the main components to create a sustainable
strategy in cultural projects. That components are:
•

Ecological Integrity

•

Efficiency

•

Equity

•

Cultural Integrity

•

Community

•

Balance

•

Development as realization of potential.

It is fundamental for a cultural project to establish clear goals and objectives towards
sustainability and work constantly to achieve them. Nothing can be achieved without
the participation and the collaboration of all the stakeholders. The planning for a
sustainable development could vary depending the circumstances of the local
community. Finally, cultural heritage should βe managed sustainably in order to
contribute to the society.

3. Delos
3.1. Introduction to Delos
Delos was one the most important Panhellenic sanctuaries, and, according to
mythology, the birth-place of Apollo and Artemis. Delos was a sacred place with
splendid buildings and sanctuaries and as such, it was never forgotten; many
references are preserved by travelers who visited the island in the last centuries.
Numerous pieces of sculpture were transferred to museums of Greece and abroad,
while marbles from the ancient buildings were used as building material by the
inhabitants of the nearby islands. Excavations on Delos started in 1873 by the French
School of Archaeology at Athens and by 1914 the most significant sections of the
ancient site had been uncovered. The years 1958-1975 were also a period of
intensive excavations, which continue up to date by the French School of
Archaeology. Restricted excavations were also conducted by Greek archaeologists at
the beginning of the 20th century. In 1990 Delos was included in the World's Cultural
Heritage Sites and Monuments, protected by the UNESCO.
17

Image 3; Source: Laveranda-Mykonos.com
3.2. Brief History
Delos must always raise some astonishment when one compares is size to its history.
Although a small rocky island, no more than 5 kilometers long and 1.3 metres wide,
for ancient Greeks was the most sacred place. It is situated right in the heart of
Cycladic islands and right next to Mykonos.
The earlier inhabitants of Delos build (ca 2.500 BC) their simple dwellings on the top
of the low hill Kynthos, where from they could easily watch towards the sea around
the island for coming enemies. The Mycenaeans, who came later on (end of 15th
century BC), decided to settle in the small valley by the sea.
The Apollonian sanctuary established at least since the 9th century BC reached the
peak of its glory during the archaic (7th-6th century BC) and classical (5th-4th
century BC) period, when Hellenes from all over the Greek world gathered there to
worship Apollo, the god of light, harmony and balance, and Artemis, the moongoddess, his twin sister.
By the end of the 5th cent. BC there were already some houses and farms around
18

the sanctuary. The town seen today developed rapidly after 167 BC, when, as a
result of the declaration of Delos as a free port, all the commercial activity of the
eastern Mediterranean was congregated on the island. Rich merchants, bankers, and
ship-owners from all over the world settled there, attracting many builders, artists
and craftsmen who build for them luxurious houses, richly decorated with statues,
frescoes and mosaic floors (same of them well-maintained until this day). The tiny
island became soon the maximum emporium totius orbis terrarum - the greatest
commercial center of the world.
It is estimated that at the beginning of the 1st century BC, some 30.000 people were
living on this small island that is no more than a dot on the map of the
Mediterranean, and that it is likely that 750,000 tons of merchandise could be
moved through its ports in a year. This is a tremendous amount of merchandise for
that time and of course difficult to be transferred.
The prosperity of the island and the friendly relations with the Romans were the
main cause of its destruction. Delos was attacked and looted twice: in 88 BC by
Mithridates, the King of Pontus, an enemy of the Romans, and later, in 69 BC, by the
pirates of Athenodorus, an ally of Mithridates. Since then the island was gradually
abandoned and fell rapidly into decline.
In the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD only a small settlement existed on Delos and, as
Christianity had gradually replaced the ancient religion, the island finally lost its
importance (GTP, 2014).
The excavations, that started in 1872 and are still in progress, have unearthed the
Sanctuary and a good part of the cosmopolitan Hellenistic town (Chatzidakis 2012).
3.3. Authenticity and integrity.
Authenticity of Delos is not to been challenge, the whole island is an archeological
site, as everything in landscape remain without changes the last 130 years, since the
island has no permanent habitats, nothing built on the ruins of this ancient
civilization, except of a few small houses used by the personnel that works on the
island (UNESCO.org). This fact offers a unique authenticity factor for the
archeological site. The restoration aims to the preservation of the monument.
The entire island of Delos is an archaeological site, protected under the provisions of
Law 3028/2002 “On the Protection of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage in general”.
19

The Ministry of Culture, Education and Religious Affairs is the competent body in
charge of the site and inspecting all works that are carried out on the site. The
Ephorate of Antiquities of Cyclades, the competent Regional Service of the Ministry,
is responsible for its management and preservation of the site. All the works carried
out in the archaeological site are supervised by the Committee for the Conservation
of the Monuments of Delos, a scientific body that plans, supervises and implements
work-programmes for the conservation, support and restoration of the monuments,
as well as for the presentation and protection of the property.
Because of potential damage by the north wind, fragile marble sculptures, such as
the Naxian Lions, were transported to the Museum and have been replaced with
exact replicas. In the Museum the artifacts are well-protected and is easier to be
examined by the scientific team.
Many projects have been planned and implemented on the vast archaeological site
of Delos in recent years, with funds raised from the European Union and the Greek
State. The aim of the works has been the conservation and consolidation of the
monuments and the creation of visitors’ pathways, thus ensuring access to the entire
archaeological site, especially for people with disabilities due to the distinctiveness
of Delos which contains hills and dirt roads. Moreover, the works aspired to make
the visit to the site instructive, meaningful and safe and visitors.
Antiquity guards, archaeologists, conservators, architects and technicians working on
the island throughout the year carrying out important conservation, restoration and
site-presentation work, aiming to initiate an accessible site, more “legible”,
comprehensible and friendly to the numerous visitors.
Guides
The guides that work on the island are the main representatives of the cultural
heritage of Delos. They are experienced, professional and informative helping
visitors understand the meaning and the importance of the site. The fair that
travelers have to pay for a private guide is reasonable and through the guidance
visitors are getting familiar with the place, learning the history and understand the
way of living and thinking of the people that use to live there many centuries ago.
Rabotic (2010) argues that “the main task of guides is to help visitors in locating,
perceiving and understanding different features of a destination”.
20

3.4. Problems and difficulties.
Renovation and refurbishment of the museum is deemed necessary in order to
enhance visitors’ experience. Museums are key functions on the sites as they are
presenting an authoritative interpretation of the significance of a place through time
(McIntosh & Prentice 1999). A more modern museum could be a great contribute to
the whole cultural experience. Apart from that it could make the work of archeology
professionals easier, regarding the conservation and maintenance of the artifacts.
A better Museum is crucial for the exhibition of sculptures, frescos and artifacts, as
they could be presented to visitors in a more intriguing and interactive way, based
on modern archeological museums in Europe.
Main problem of Delos is its remote location. The location of the island causing
accessibility problems visitors as well as the personnel. Furthermore, its remote
access increases the cost of goods transferred to Delos and make the work of
planners and decision makers ever harder.
The only way for tourists to visit Delos is via vessels that embark from the old port of
Mykonos. The duration of the trip is approximately 30 minutes. These vessels are
owned by a private organization called Delos Tours.

21

Image 4. Source: UNESCO.org. Link < whc.unesco.org/en/documents/110753 >

22

3.5. Statistics about the site
Incoming Visitors per month Graph

Annual Visitors
30000
27707
25765

25350
23977

25000

21573 20727 21381
21431
20443
19771 19318
18021
17819
16500 17053

20000
15000
10000
7471
6894
5223

5000
0

15627
13520
12051

24
0

41
8
0

2099
1471
467

808
235
102

2017

2016

325
7
0

2015

Graph 1. Source: www.statistics.gr
This line graph shows that tourist flows are peaking from May till October. On the
over hand, the number of visitors on the island is insignificant from November until
April. Therefore, Delos has to cope with seasonality effect. This is a common
problem for Greek islands especially for those that attract tourists for sun and sea
tourism.

23

Total visitors annually

TOTAL VISITORS ANNUALLY
160000
140000
120000
100000
80000
60000
103842

99395
81522

40000

119525

112838
92548

95883

2012

2013

135392

134401
113416

20000
0
2008

2009

2010

2011

2014

2015

2016

2017

Graph 2. Source: www.statistics.gr
The graph indicates a trend of raising visitors during the last 3 years. There is a
significant difference between the worst performance of the site in 2010 (81522
visitors) in contrast to the best performance in 2017 (135392 visitors).
Earnings from the archeological site per month in 2017.

Earnings per month
January
February
March
13%

0%5%
1%
16%

April
May
June

22%
13%

July
August

14%

16%

September
October
November
December

Graph 3. Source: www.statistics.gr
Pie graph indicates that the largest number of tourists visited the site in September.
There also huge differences in the tourist flows between January, February, March
and December with the rest of the months.
24

Earnings in Euro per year.

Earnings in Euro
1400000
1245084
1135283

1200000
1000000
800000
600000
430057

488801

518680

486307

577130

388430 406671

398712

400000
200000
0
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Graph 4. Source: www.statistics.gr
In this bar chart, it is depicted the huge difference in earnings the last two years, in
comparison with the previous years. This fact creates hopes for a fruitful future, as
generated profits could be invested on the project. Earnings in 2017 are almost three
times more than those in 2008. On the other hand, this achievement came without a
respective rise in visitors.

4. Methodology
Participants/Sample
The sample of this analysis, is consisted of 51 participants, either males or females,
who visited the Delos Island. Most of them are postgraduates, from 35 to 49 years
old and either coming from UK or USA.
The aim of the research
This research is aiming to analyze to what extend Delos can develop its product as a
cultural related destination. Specifically, we will examine the level of the
participants’ satisfaction, the quality of the provided services and ways of improving
the product, according to the participants.

25

Research plan
The questionnaire was distributed to people who had visited or were visiting the
Delos Island and its sites, so the sample would be more accurate and specific, aiming
to reach participants who would give valid opinions about the subject. The
questionnaires were distributed in person, by this way the outcomes are more
accurate, and the researcher was sure that will get replies. Then the SPSS program
was used, to analyze the percentages, means and standard deviations about each
question and to get a general view of the participants’ opinions.

Questionnaire
For this research, a questionnaire got created to analyze the cultural heritage of
Delos Island. The questionnaire was short and tried to examine the elements of the
research in short and inclusive questions. Outcomes are comprehensive regarding
customers satisfaction, impressions about the site and personal information. The
questionnaire is consisted of 13 questions, 4 of which are closed-ended and referring
to the demographic characteristics of the participants. The rest 8 are related to the
participants’ satisfaction, the quality of the provided services and the ways of
improving the products. 5 of these questions are Likert style, while the other 4 are
once again, closed-ended questions.

26

5.Descriptive Statistics
5.1. Demographic characteristics
In this chapter, the participants’ demographic characteristics are presented.
Specifically, we will analyze their age, gender, educational level and nationality.
In Table 1 and Graph 1, we notice that the 43.1% of the sample is from 35 to 49
years old, while the 37.3% belongs to the scale between 18 to 34 years. Lastly, those
who are 50 years old or more, occupy the rest 19.6%. Age of the sample is an
important factor for the segmentation because planning of the project can take into
consideration the age groups attracted to launch a more suitable marketing
campaign.

Table 1: Age
Cumulative
Frequency Valid Percent Percent
Valid

18-34

19

37.3

37.3

35-49

22

43.1

80.4

50+

10

19.6

100.0

Total

51

100.0

Graph 1: Age

27

Continuing with the participants’ gender, which is presented through Table 2 and
Graph 2, we see that the 47.1% of them are females and males reach the percentage
of 47.1%. Also, the choice “Other” occupies only the 2% of the total answers. The
difference between the genders seem to be insignificant, both genders almost
equally participated to the research.
Table 2: Gender
Cumulative
Frequency Valid Percent Percent
Valid

Male

24

47.1

47.1

Female

26

51.0

98.0

Other

1

2.0

100.0

Total

51

100.0

Graph 2: Gender

28

In Table 3 and Graph 3, the participants’ educational level is presented. 47.1% of
them are postgraduates, while the 33.3% belongs to the undergraduates. Lastly, the
participants who have a basic educational level occupy the 19.6% of the sample. This
graph also depicts that the education level of the participants is high. Therefore, only
19.6% has basic education level.
Table 3: Educational level
Cumulative
Frequency Valid Percent Percent
Valid

Basic

10

19.6

19.6

Undergraduate 17

33.3

52.9

Postgraduate

24

47.1

100.0

Total

51

100.0

Graph 3: Educational level

29

In Table 4 and Graph 4, we analyze the participants’ nationality. USA and UK own
19.2% of the total answers each and follows Greece, with 9.6%. Germany reaches
the 7.7%, while Mexico, Turkey, Italy, Portugal and Russia each occupies 3.8% of the
answers. Finally, the choice “Other” reaches the 25% and is consisted of answers
(Canada, Sweden, Scotland, Ireland, Spain, Lebanon, France, Belgium, Croatia,
Serbia, Norway, Colombia, None) that were mentioned only once, and it would be
meaningless to present them separately.

30

Table 4: Nationality
Cumulative

Valid

Frequency

Valid Percent

Percent

USA

10

19.2

19.2

UK

10

19.2

38.5

Mexico

2

3.8

42.3

Greece

5

9.6

51.9

Germany

4

7.7

59.6

Turkey

2

3.8

63.5

Italy

2

3.8

67.3

Portugal

2

3.8

71.2

Russia

2

3.8

75.0

Other

13

25.0

100.0

Graph 4: Nationality

31

Main questionnaire
In this section, the questions related to the participants’ level satisfaction, the quality
of provided services and ways of improving the product, will be presented and
analyzed through the following tables and graphs.
In Table 5 and Graph 5, we will analyze the ways that the participants found out
about Delos Island. The 43.6% of the total answers are referring to the hotel’s
recommendation and follow, with 21.8%, the information from travel agencies.
Travel websites occupy the 18.2%, while information received word to mouth reach
the 9.1%. Last are placed the travel blogs, owing the 7.3% of the total answers.

Table 5: How did you find out about Delos Island as an archaeological site
Cumulative

Valid

Frequency

Valid Percent Percent

Travel blogs

4

7.3

7.3

Word of mouth

5

9.1

16.4

Travel agency

12

21.8

38.2

Hotel's recommendation 24

43.6

81.8

Travel websites

18.2

100.0

10

Graph 5: How did you find out about Delos Island as an archaeological site

32

In the following Table 6 and Graph 6, we notice that the 52.9% of the participants
have participated in a guided tour, while the rest 47.1% never took part into such an
activity.

Table 6: Have you participated in a guided tour
Cumulative
Frequency Valid Percent Percent
Valid

Yes

27

52.9

52.9

No

24

47.1

100.0

Total

51

100.0

Graph 6: Have you participated in a guided tour

In Table 7 and Graph 7, we see that the 87% of the participants who took part
in the guided tour, were in a group, while only 13% decided to be guided privately.

Table 7: Did you participate in a guided tour in group or private
Cumulative
Frequency Valid Percent Percent
Valid

Group

20

87.0

87.0

Private

3

13.0

100.0
33

Missing
Total

Total

23

System

28

100.0

51

Graph 7: Did you participate in a guided tour in group or private

In Table 8 and Graph 8, we analyze the participants’ satisfaction from their
experience at Delos and its archeological sites and museums. The answers are
consisted of values from 1 to 5 (1- Not satisfied, 2- Less satisfied, 3- Satisfied, 4More satisfied, 5- Very satisfied) and as the mean of each question increases, so
does the satisfaction of the participants. The participants believe that the general
activity was quite sufficient (4.0), since they answered, “More satisfied”. Between
the answers “Satisfied” and “More satisfied”, with a lean to the second, they appear
to be about the time spend on the archeological museums (3.76), while in the same
scale, but leaning into the answer “Satisfied”, appear the following questions:
•

“How do you evaluate the accessibility to Delos Island” (3.43)

•

“How do you evaluate the infrastructure of the archaeological site including
Museum, Reception, Café/Restaurant and exhibition site” (3.35)

•

“Were you satisfied with the price of the entrance fee” (3.33).

34

Table 8: Satisfaction from the activities at Delos
Mean

Std.
Deviation

How do you evaluate the infrastructure of the
archaeological site including Museum, Reception,

3.35

1.036

3.43

1.063

3.76

0.992

Were you satisfied with the price of the entrance fee

3.33

1.306

Generally speaking was it a satisfactory activity

4.00

1.095

Café/Restaurant and exhibition site
How do you evaluate the accessibility to Delos Island
Were you satisfied with the time spent on the
archaeological site

Graph 8: Satisfaction from the activities at Delos
4,00

Generally speaking was it a satisfactory activity

1,095
3,33

Were you satisfied with the price of the entrance
fee

1,306
3,76

Were you satisfied with the time spent on the
archaeological site

0,992
3,43

How do you evaluate the accessibility to Delos
Island

1,063

How do you evaluate the infrastructure of the
archaeological site including Museum, Reception,
Café/Restaurant and exhibition site

1,036

Mean

3,35

Std. Deviation

35

In Table 9 and Graph 9, we will present the ways in which the experience of
visiting Delos Island could be enhanced, according to the participants. The 26.2% of
the total answers refer to a modern museum and second, with 24.6%, comes the
demand of less queues. Audio guides and better planning reach the 20% and 15.4%
respectively, while the demand of more options on the guided tour owns the 9.2%.
Lastly, the 4.6% of the answers belongs to the idea of local guides.

Table 9: What do you think that would enhance your experience visiting Delos
Island
Cumulative

Valid

Frequency

Valid Percent Percent

Better planning

10

15.4

15.4

A modern Museum

17

26.2

41.5

More options on the

6

9.2

50.8

Less queues

16

24.6

75.4

Audio guides

13

20.0

95.4

Local guides

3

4.6

100.0

guided tours

Graph 9: What do you think that would enhance your experience visiting Delos Island

36

5.2. Inductive Statistics
In this section, some statistical tests were used, in order to extract dependencies
between the answers referring to the satisfaction levels of the participants as for
their activities in Delos and their demographic characteristics. More specifically, we
ran 15 Kruskal-Wallis tests, between the demographics “Age”, “Educational level”
and “Gender”, as for the 5 questions of Table 8 mentioned above. This test was
selected due to the small sample we have, according to the Central Limited
Theorem, which indicates that if the grouping variable splits the data into groups
with less than 30 participants, then a non-parametric test should be used in order to
extract possible dependencies as for this variable. The output of the test is a value
(p-value), which is used as an indicator of a dependency’s existence. If this value is
below 0.05, then the assumptions of common behavior of the subgroups (age,
education and gender) as for the studied characteristics (the 5 questions of Table 8)
are rejected, so statistically significant dependencies are revealing.
In Table 10, we can see that from the 15 tests, the only statistically significant results
is about gender and the entrance’s price satisfaction (p-value=0.023).
Table 10: Kruskal-Wallis tests
Age

Educational level Gender

0.454

0.449

0.632

0.628

0.085

0.514

0.513

0.180

0.451

0.593

0.100

0.023

How do you evaluate the infrastructure of the
archaeological site including Museum, Reception,
Café/Restaurant and exhibition site
How do you evaluate the accessibility to Delos Island
Were you satisfied with the time spent on the
archaeological site
Were you satisfied with the price of the entrance fee

37

Generally speaking was it a satisfactory activity

0.177

0.066

0.798

In Graph 10, the way in which this dependency occurs, is shown. As we can see,
males tend to be more satisfied than any other participant, with an overall mean of
3.8, which indicates high satisfaction levels.

Graph 10: Mean plot of entrance’s price, as for gender

38

5.3. Results
In the previous research, we analyzed the participants’ satisfaction from visiting
Delos and its sites and museums, the quality of the provided services they
experienced and the ways, which they believe that would improve the productstours. For this purpose, 51 participants, both males and females, answered the
questionnaire. Most of them belong to the age scale from 35 to 49 years old, are
postgraduates and come either from USA or UK.
The most popular source, from which the information about Delos were found, are
the hotels’ recommendations. Only a little more than half of the sample has
participated in a guided tour, mostly as a part of a group. Also, the participants seem
quite satisfied from the general activities they tried at Delos and the time spend on
archeological museums, but they seem slightly less satisfied when it comes to the
accessibility to the island, the in fracture of the archeological or exhibition sites and
the price of the entrance fee. Lastly, the travelers believe that a modern museum
and less queues would enhance the experience of visiting the Delos Island.
Finally, a statistically significant dependency was discovered between the
participants’ gender and the entrance’s price satisfaction. Specifically, the males of
the research seem to be more satisfied with the fee they have to pay to visit a
museum or site, than women or those who sexually identify as “Other”.

6. Discussion
After reviewing all the available literature, collecting and analyzing data, in this
chapter the researcher is about to analyze the results and how literature review is
linked to the research.
In the literature review all the aspects of a cultural related project are analyzed.
Cultural Heritage Tourism is a fundamental type of tourism for Greece and Delos
should be part of it. The main question is to analyze in which point is Delos now as a
cultural related site and what can be done to raise all the benefits that comes with a
sustainable cultural tourism development. Benefits from cultural tourism

39

development can be economic and socio-cultural and can be important for a remote
small island like Delos.
It is very important for future planning to segment the visitors and be aware of their
characteristics, because then the policy and plan-makers can launch a campaign that
will target a specific group of tourists. The biggest percentage of visitors 43.14% are
aged between 35-49 years old. Therefore, they are quite young people who have the
will to visit the place. The difference between the two genders is insignificance, this
means that both women and men are interested in the site. However, men are more
satisfied with the entrance fee.
Regarding the educational level 47.06% of the sample are postgraduates and only
19.61% have basic education. This leads us to the conclusion that well-educated
people visited the site. This is usual for cultural related sites, as they mostly attract
visitors who are well-educated. These visitors seek for opportunities to acquire
knowledge and experiences. With this vital information planner-makers could
evaluate the situation and understand who the potential future visitors of the site
are.
The two main nationalities of the visitors are British and USA. These two types of
travelers come from far away and spent a lot of money in order to get a unique and
authentic experience of the site as it is reviewed in cultural tourists motivations.
Most of them they do not travel only for cultural reasons. Tourism of sea and sun is
the most popular in Greece, but many tourists choose to combine it with cultural
related sites as they have a unique opportunity to experience an ancient civilization
know all over the world.
First question in the main questionnaire indicates the lack of strong online presence
of the site, as the vast majority of the visitors (43.64%) find it out from hotel
recommendations and not from an online campaign or a blog. Tourists nowadays are
always searching for interesting activities within a destination before they visit it. As
it is reviewed it literature about cultural heritage tourist’s profile, this type of visitors
goes online to search information about the site that they are going to visit. They are
well-prepared and informed about the culture and the heritage of the destination.
Furthermore, they tend to ask for additional information, especially to the hotel’s

40

concierge who can recommend a constructive activity to spend their time when on
vacation.
About the guided tours only 52.94% have participated in a guided tour. Guided tours
are one of the best ways for visitors to apprehend and learn about the ancient
civilization and all the attributes of the site. Guided tours are an institution that
should be promoted, as their proficient and skilled and the can impart knowledge to
visitors. The most important factor of the guided tour is the in person and in the spot
guide, which is crucial for a tourist to comprehend the information. Thus plannermakers should take into consideration the importance of using locals as guides and
to empower tourists to hire guides.
Although visitors are generally satisfied about the site as it has a mean value of 4.00
out of 5.00, they don’t seem to rate so high the infrastructure of the site (Museum,
café/restaurant, Reception) as it has a mean value of 3.35. This difference spotted in
the outcomes, underlines the necessity of improved infrastructure for the site. As it
is reviewed in the literature a modern Museum will assist the site and will increase
customer satisfaction. It is an investment that will help the not only the visitors but
also the local community. Furthermore, the rest of the facilities, Café, restaurant,
reception and souvenir store, can raise great amount of profits if they are utilized
properly. As it is reviewed side profits from these facilities could be significant and
can be invested to create jobs for the local community. Many famous sites across the
world provide outstanding service along with expensive souvenirs to gain profits and
make their sites economically sustainable.
Visitors seem to be unsatisfied with the price of the entrance fee, it had a mean
value of 3.33 out of 5.00. The entrance fee costs 12 euro for adults, and it is surely
expensive if compared with other archeological sites in Greece (Entrance fee in
Acropolis costs 10 euro). Additionally, visitors have to pay for their transportation to
Delos, the boat’s return ticket from Mykonos costs 20 euro, this fact raises the
cumulative cost and make visitors unsatisfied with the price.
Most of the visitors believe that a better Museum would enhance their experience of
the site, as this answer came first with a frequency of 17 and a valid percentage of
26.2%. Second most popular answer is less queues with small difference. Therefore,
visitors believe that these two factors are the most important for their experience in
41

the site. That is reasonable as cultural heritage tourists seek for authentic
experiences the don’t care about weather conditions but rather for a more
informative, modern museum and more valuable time on the island.

7. Conclusions and recommendations.
In this chapter the researcher is going to evaluate the outcomes of the work done
and to come up with some recommendations, that will assist to the main topic.
The main objective of this project was to explore all the aspects of cultural tourism
and what are the benefits of cultural tourism development within a destination. As
an authentic cultural destination Delos has to be promoted and to take advantage of
all the fruitful outcomes that sustainable cultural tourism development can provide.
The research focused on stating the current situation on the island, gather opinions
of the visitors about the site and facilities and to segment tourists. The outcomes
analyzed and gave some interesting results about the perspective of the visitors and
their profiles.
Based on the results of the research and literature, it is now safe to recommend
some solutions that can promote the site and help it to make a step forward, in the
quest to become a major cultural heritage destination.
Firstly, a new, modern museum should be built to replace the old one. As it is shown
in the literature, museums are crucial for cultural heritage sites and they can
enhance tourists’ experience. This investment can be productive as the benefits will
be various. It can create new working positions for local people, especially for people
who live in remote islands with high unemployment rate. The new museum will be
capable to perceive and sustain the antiquities in a more sufficient manner, as
modern museums focus on better conditions of maintenance. It is natural that all
these authentic artifacts gathered on the island are fragile, and their maintenance
takes a lot of work and is costly. Finally, a new museum will augment visitors’
experience and can boost the marketing campaign of the site. As an example of the
benefits a modern museum can bring to a site, is the museum of Acropolis, its

42

contribution to the site of Acropolis is significant and it attracts a great number of
visitors annually.
Secondly, a new, contemporary marketing campaign should be designed and
launched about the site. After segmenting the visitors and knowing all their special
characteristics, marketing-specialists can design a tailor-made marketing campaign
that can attract possible visitors and people who are interested in art and culture.
These advertisements should be online, so they can target the right people and
inform the group of people who is really interested. With the right content and
strategy, Delos can be appealing, and tourists of Greek islands will be familiar with its
art and authenticity. Greek authorities like the Ministry of tourism and the ephorate
of antiquities should collaborate along with the local community to create suitable
content and establish an image of the site and how should be branded.
Social media marketing is also a fundamental factor for a marketing campaign
nowadays. Social media marketing is proved a low-cost and highly yielding way of
advertisement. Pages like Facebook, YouTube, Instagram and Google have millions of
daily visitors and can turn into a useful tool of promoting a destination.
These actions will increase awareness about the site, thus Delos will be depending
on Hotel’s recommendations as it is depicted on the survey results, but it will create
its own reputation among tourists.
Third recommendation is about the price, as it is clear that visitors who participated
in the survey weren’t happy about the price. Authorities of the site can create a
package that includes transportation to the site, guides and maybe a small souvenir.
This package will create an appealing decision for tourists, even for tourists that
culture heritage is not their first priority when on vacation. Also, by this package
visitors will comprehend the site better as they will be guided by professionals.
Visits to the souvenirs shop could raise side-profits, as it is already argued that
profits of cultural heritage sites could from many different activities.
In addition, this offer can address the problem of seasonality and manage capacity.
As it is known some months of the year the site has only a small number of visitors
on contrary during the summer months number of visitors is peaking, creating long
lines that are not pleasant. Through this package visitors can get great value of their
money and the site earns visitors and good reputation.
43

These actions regarding the site are expected to add value and make steps forward
regarding cultural heritage development. Finally, cultural heritage is something to
respect and make people proud of, why not to promote it in a sustainable way, so
people from all over the world can be inspired and learn from it. Nowadays, new
technology allows us to inform people about this treasure and to share a part of it
with them. People should never forget that archeology is not only stones, temples
and paintings, is mostly about the people lived there and their story will be part of
the island forever.

“What you leave behind is not what is engraved in stone monuments, but what is
woven into the lives of others.”
Pericles (495-429 BC) Athens.

44

8. References
1. Aas C., Ladkin A., Fletcher J., (2005), Stakeholder Collaboration and Heritage
Management, Annals of Tourism Research Vol.32, Elsevier, pp. 28-48.
2. Bruner E.M. (1994) Abraham Lincoln as authentic reproduction: a critique of postmodernism, American Anthropologist.
3. Bowitz E., Ibenholt K. (2008), Economic impacts and cultural heritage research and
perspectives, in Journal of Cultural Heritage.
4. Chatzidakis P.I. (2012). Delos, a World Cultural Site since 1990 [Online] Available
at: http://odysseus.culture.gr/h/3/eh351.jsp?obj_id=2371 [Accessed 20/12/2018].
5. Chen, J.S. (1998) Travel motivation of heritage tourists, Tourism Analysis,
Cognizant Communication Corporation, pp. 213-215.
6. Driver, B., Brown P. and Peterson G. (1991) Benefits of Leisure, State College PA:
Venture Publishing.
7. Fyall A. and Garrod B., (1998) Heritage Tourism: At what price? , in Managing
Leisure, pp 213-218.
8. Greek Travel Pages, (2014), Archaeological Site of Delos, Accessed in 05/11/2018,
< https://news.gtp.gr/2014/05/09/archaeological-site-delos >
9. Girard L.F., Nijkamp P., (2009) Cultural Tourism and Sustainable Local
Development Ashgate publishing company.
10. Gill, A.M (1996) Rooms with a view: informal settings for public dialogue, Society
and natural resources 9(magazine), pp. 633.
11. Hall C.M. and Mc Arthur S., (1998), Integrated Heritage Management: Principles
and practice, The stationery Office, London.
12. Huh J., Uysal M. & McCleary K., (2008) Cultural/Heritage Destinations: Tourist
Satisfaction and Market Segmentation, Journal of Hospitality & Leisure Marketing.
13. Hellenic Statistical Authority, (2018), Admissions to archaeological sites by
month, Accessed in 10/12/2018, < http://www.statistics.gr/el/home >
14. ICOMOS, (2002), A Cultural Heritage Manifesto, Accessed in 10/11/2018,
< http://www.icomosuk.org/uploads/sidebar/PDF/A%20Cultural%20Heritage%20Manifesto >
15. Mathieson, A., and G. Wall (1984) Tourism: Economic, Physical and Social
Impacts. New York: Longman House.
45

16. McIntosh J.A., Prentice R.C., (1999), Affirming Authenticity Consuming Cultural
Heritage, Annals of Tourism Research Vol. 23, Elsevier, pp. 589-612.
17. McKercher B. (2000), Towards a Classification of Cultural Tourists, International
Journal of Tourism research, Hong Kong.
18. MFA.gr Hellenic Republic (2019), History and Culture, Accessed in 05/12/2018,
< https://www.mfa.gr/usa/en/about-greece/history-and-culture >
19. Odysseus.Culture.gr, (2012), Delos, a World Cultural Site since 1990, Accessed in
02/12/2018,
< http://odysseus.culture.gr/h/3/eh351.jsp?obj_id=2371 >
20. Rabotić B. (2010) Tourist Guides In Contemporary Tourism, Sarajevo,
International conference on tourism and environment
21. Regjeringen.no, (2005), Living with our cultural Heritage, Report No. 16 to the
Storting (2004-2005), Ministry of Climate and Environment, Norway. Accessed in
13/12/2018.
< https://www.regjeringen.no/en/dokumenter/report-no.-16-to-the-storting-20042005/id406291/sec1 >
22. Richards G. (2001), The development of Cultural Tourism in Europe, Tilburg
University, CABI International: The Netherlands, pp. 7.
23. Ritzer G, (1996), The McDonaldization Thesis: Is expansion inevitable? University
of Maryland.
24. Rocca L., Chiabai A., Chiarullo L., (2013), Cultural Heritage Management at a local
level: A Geo-spatial e-Participation Approach, IGI Global.
25. Silberberg T. (1995), Cultural Tourism and Business Opportunities for Museums
and Heritage Sites, in Tourism Management, pp. 361-365.
26. Smith, S (1989) Funding our heritage, in D.L. Uzzell edition, Heritage
Interpretation, vol.2 The visitor experience, Belhaven, London.
27. Smith V.L. (1998) Privatization in the third world: small-scale tourism enterprises
in W.F. Theobald (ed.) Global tourism, 2nd edition, Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
28. UNESCO.org, (2019), Outstanding Universal Value, Accessed in 05/12/2018,
< https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/530 >
29. World Travel & Tourism Council, (2018), Priorities, Accessed in 12/12/2018,
< https://www.wttc.org/priorities/ >
46

30. Wall G. (1989) An international perspective on his historic sites, recreation, and
tourism recreation research review.
31. Wall G., (1993), International collaboration in the search of sustainable tourism in
Bali, Indonesia, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, pp. 38-47.
32. Yavuz, N. F., (1994). A market segmentation study of visitors to North Cyprus
through importance-performance analysis of destination attributes. Virginia:
Polytechnic Institute and State University.

47

9. Appendix

Appendix 1
Questionnaire results coded in Excel

Questionnai

Ta

Ta

Ta

Ta

Ta

Q

bl

bl

bl

bl

bl

1

e

e

e

e

e

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5

3

5

4

5

5

2

2

3

5

4

5

2

re 1
Questionnai

Y-

Q3

Q4

Q5

Q

Q

6

7

Q8

4+5

2

2

1

3

canada

3

2

2

1

2

USA

group

re 2
Questionnai

Q2

Ygroup

1

2

4

2

4

2

no

2

3

3

2

2

USA

4

2

5

4

5

1

no

3

1+3

2

2

2

Sweden

4

3

5

4

5

2

Y-

3

2

2

2

3

US

re 3
Questionnai
re 4
Questionnai
re 5
Questionnai

group
3

2

2

4

3

2

NO

4

2

2

1

2

UK

4

4

5

3

4

2

No

3+4

2

2

2

3

Mexico

3

4

3

3

4

2

No

5

2

2

2

2

Scotland

3

5

4

4

4

3

No

2

1

1

1

1

Uk

2

3

4

4

4

3

No

5

5

3

2

3

Uk

3

1

5

1

2

1

No

3

5

2

1

2

UK

4

4

4

5

5

2

Y-

4

5

2

1

3

USA

4

5

1

1

3

USA

re 6
Questionnai
re 7
Questionnai
re 8
Questionnai

Edinburgh

re 9
Questionnai
re 10
Questionnai
re 11
Questionnai
re 12
Questionnai

group
4

4

4

5

5

2

re 13
Questionnai

Ygroup

3

3

3

3

3

1

No

4

3

1

2

2

USA

4

4

4

5

5

2

Y-

4

2

2

1

3

UK

4

5

3

1

3

USA

3

2

1

2

3

Turkey

re 14
Questionnai
re 15
Questionnai

group
4

5

4

4

4

2

re 16
Questionnai
re 17

Ygroup

5

5

5

5

5

3

Ygroup

48

Questionnai

4

5

3

5

5

2

re 18
Questionnai

Y-

4

3+4+5

1

1

3

Greek-English

group
5

5

5

5

5

3

No

1+4+5

2+4

1

2

3

Ireland

4

4

3

1

4

3

Y-

3

3

2

2

2

Italian

3

2

3

2

1

Spainish

2

2

1

2

2

Greek

re 19
Questionnai
re 20
Questionnai

group
4

3

3

2

3

1

2

3

4

2

3

2

re 21
Questionnai

group

re 22
Questionnai

Y-

Ygroup

3

3

3

1

5

1

no

4

2+4

1

2

2

Turkish

4

3

2

1

4

2

Y-

5

1+4+5

2

2

2

Lebanon

re 23
Questionnai
re 24
Questionnai

group
4

3

4

4

5

2

no

1

4

1

1

2

Italian

3

3

4

4

5

3

no

3

2

2

1

1

French

4

5

5

5

4

2

no

1

4

3

2

2

Portuguese

4

3

3

4

4

3

y-

4

2

1

1

1

US

2

1

2

2

3

Portuguese

re 25
Questionnai
re 26
Questionnai
re 27
Questionnai
re 28

Privat
e

Questionnai

2

2

2

3

2

2

re 29
Questionnai

Ygroup

2

4

4

4

4

3

no

3

1+4

2

1

2

US

2

3

3

1

4

2

Y-

2

4+5

3

2

3

German

3

1+4+6 (local-

2

2

3

English

re 30
Questionnai
re 31

privat
e

Questionnai

3

3

4

2

3

1

no

re 32
Questionnai

guide)
3

4

4

2

5

2

re 33
Questionnai

Y-

5

4+5

2

2

3

French

group
2

3

2

3

2

1

no

4

1+4

1

1

1

German

3

3

3

2

4

1

yes

1

6

3

1

3

Belgium

4

3

3

2

3

2

no

3

6

3

2

3

Croatia

4

3

4

4

4

2

Y-

4

4

1

1

1

Greek

re 34
Questionnai
re 35
Questionnai
re 36
Questionnai
re 37
Questionnai

group
3

3

5

4

3

2

no

4

1

2

2

2

Greek

3

4

5

5

5

2

no

4

4

1

2

3

Russian

re 38
Questionnai
re 39

49

Questionnai

1

1

3

5

5

2

no

5

1

2

1

3

German

5

4

3

2

1

2

Y-

4

5

1

1

3

Serbian

4

4

4

4

3

2

4

1

2

1

3

none

re 40
Questionnai
re 41
Questionnai

group

re 42

Yprivat
e

Questionnai

4

4

4

2

4

1

yes

4

4

2

1

1

Norway

1

1

1

1

1

1

no

4

5

1

2

1

Russian

3

3

4

4

5

2

Yes-

4

2

1

2

3

Colombian

re 43
Questionnai
re 44
Questionnai
re 45
Questionnai

group
4

3

3

3

5

2

no

4

2

1

3

2

US

3

3

3

4

3

2

Y-

4

4

3

1

1

UK

re 46
Questionnai
re 47
Questionnai

group
5

5

5

3

5

1

no

5

4

2

2

2

UK

4

5

5

4

5

1

Y-

4

5

1

2

3

German

re 48
Questionnai
re 49
Questionnai

group
5

4

5

3

5

1

yes

5

3

1

1

3

UK

4

4

4

4

4

3

yes

5

2

3

1

1

Mexican

re 50
Questionnai
re 51

50

Appendix 2
Questionnaire distributed at guests.
Cultural heritage of Delos
My name is John Arnaoutis and I am currently studying at the International Hellenic
University. I am conducting a survey about cultural heritage of Delos and to what
extend could be developed as a major cultural destination in Greece.
The questionnaire consists of 10 questions and will take no more than 5 minutes to
complete. The results will be kept anonymous. Your contribution to my research will
be highly appreciated.
For any further clarification please do not hesitate to contact me at
john.arnaoutis@yahoo.com
1. What is your age?

□ 18-34
□ 35-49
□ 50+
2. What is your gender?

□ Male
□ Female
□ Other
3. What is your education level?

□ Basic
□ Undergraduate
□ Postgraduate
4. What is your nationality? _________________________________________

5. How did you find out about Delos Island as an archaeological site?

□ Travel Blogs
51

□ Word of mouth
□ Travel Agency
□ Hotel’s recommendation
□ Travel websites (i.e. tripadvisor)
6. Have you participated in a guided tour?

YES - NO

If yes in group or private?________________________________________

Please complete the following questionnaire with specific regard to the above

1.

How do you evaluate the infrastructure of the
archaeological site including Museum, Reception,
Café/Restaurant and exhibition site?

2.

How do you evaluate the accessibility to Delos Island?

3.

Were you satisfied with the time spent on the
archaeological site?

4.

Were you satisfied with the price of the entrance fee?

5.

Generally speaking was it a satisfactory activity?

52

very satisfied

more satisfied
very sufficient

satisfied
more sufficient

less satisfied
sufficient

not satisfied
less sufficient

not sufficient

enquiry, by placing a CROSS in the appropriate box

7. What do you think that would enhance your experience visiting Delos Island?

□ Better planning
□ A modern Museum
□ More options on the guided tours (I.e. more language options)
□ Less queues
□ Audio guides
□ Other (please specify : __________________________________)

Thank you for your time!

53

