International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

____________________________________________________________
EGYPTOLOGY AND TOUR GUIDING , BRIDGING THE GAP
BETWEEN THEORY AND PRACTICE
“APPLIED STUDY TO SELECTED SITES IN LUXOR ”

____________________________________________________________
HAITHAM T. SOTOHY
THE HIGHER INSTITUTE OF TOURISM AND HOTELS (EGOTH), LUXOR, EGYPT
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the link between the career of tour guiding and the
knowledge the guide must possess. Tour guiding in archeological sites
Egypt is connected to the knowledge of Egyptology; a skill the guide must
show while working in those areas. Luxor as the most important touristic
city in Egypt, and also the most important city in ancient Egyptian history;
the city was selected as the sample of the study, where selected places are
linked with Egyptological studies to reveal its importance, and how those
sites could be guided through using the academic tools such as ancient
Egyptian language, and how such knowledge could add to the tour guiding
in those sites.
KEYWORDS:

TOUR Guiding, Egypt, Egyptology, Archeological sites,
Luxor, Karnak temple, Luxor temple, West bank.

INTRODUCTION, TOUR GUIDING AND CULTURAL TOURISM
The cultural tourism was considered by the United Nations World Tourism
Organization (UNWTO), one of the major growth markets in global
tourism (UNWTO, 2001). According to this organization the cultural
tourism represents between 35–40% of all tourism worldwide, and this
type of tourism is growing at around 15% per annum, nearly three times of
growth of tourism in general (Van der Merwe, 2016, 118). Tour guiding, is
one of the oldest professions in tourism industry, through its relation to
cultural tourism, it has a critical importance in terms of promoting the
natural and historical wealth of a country effectively and efficiently
(İrigüler and Güler 2016, 203)
Tour guiding plays a very important role in tourism industry, because tour
guides are the closest persons to the tourist all over the whole tour (AL
Rawadieh 2015, 10). Tour guides are the main role-players within the
cultural tourism and their perceptions of heritage tourism represents an
important factor for enhancing the whole industry (Van der Merwe, 2016,
118).The success of the tourism industry depends in great extent on the
performance of tour guides in each destination. Tour guides are the front-

192

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

line staff who provide the “moment of truth” for tourists and can achieve
or break their trip (Zhang and Chow 2004).
Scholars differentiate between two kinds of tour guides; pathfinder; a
classical guide who just lead the tour, and mentor or innovative guide; a
culture broker who change the tour to a special tutorial experience (Cohen
1985, 8). Academics have noted that there is a need for making a shift in
tour guiding communication from presenter/ entertainer to an experience
focus, and as orchestrating or choreographing the experience (Weiler and
Black 2015b, 365).
Professional tour guiding is a work with high professional return and
satisfaction. Tourists believe that successful guides have extensive
knowledge on the history and culture of visiting places (Yenipinar 2016,
73)
A good guide considers himself a professional, and invests in his
development. The guides must keep learning, to remain relevant in a
dynamically changing world, where new audiences are emerging and
visitors increasingly feel the need for personal connection. Tour guides
need a shift in their career to be more highly skilled experience-brokers,
using information to choreograph memorable experiences (Weiler and
Black 2015b, 364).
The communicative role of the guide must be re-evaluated, and the guided
tours in general must be presented in a different way. In this context the
traditional one-way communication appears too poor in a consumer
centered tourism industry. There a need for a shift in tour guiding
communication on the side of the tour guide; as orchestrating or
choreographing the experience, and for the tour group members to be
viewed as active participants (Weiler and Black 2015b, 364).
G UIDING IN ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES
Many scholars studied the role and performance of tour guides, but on
contrary; there are very little studies dealing with analysis of guides’
interpretation in archaeological context. A significant amount of tourismrelated literature focused on the role and functions of tour guides, others
dealt with the performance and service quality. Few studies tried to
empirically investigate the guides’ interpretation at heritage sites. There is
shortage in the knowledge about tour guides, interpretation, and there is a
gap in research on different interpretation techniques. Only limited
attention has been given to the academic knowledge and personal
interpretation of tour guide in heritage sites, this increased the demand for

193

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

a more thorough understanding of guides’ interpretation in archeological
sites (Ababneh 2018, 161).
In Egypt; guiding in archeological sites is not an easy task; the knowledge
of Egyptology is the cornerstone in guiding career. The tour guides in
Egypt receive a special education focuses on history and Archeology and
other Egyptological branches related to the ancient sites they are working
in. Special academic qualities are essential in professional guiding in
ancient Egyptian archeological sites.
Many authors acknowledge the multiple roles of the guide and note that
the relevant, skills and knowledge to perform these roles can be addressed
through training and education (Black 2002; Black and Weiler 2005).
The Archeological sites as attractions could be transformed by a
professional guide into authentic ones. The suitable interpretation by the
guide contribute to gradual “sacralization” of those sites, by putting them
into their proper historical and religious atmosphere through interpretative
“keying” of the tourist’s perceptions (MacCannell 1976:44 – 45,Cohen
1985,26; Cohen 1972, 170- 171).
EGYPTOLOGY AND TOUR GUIDING
The majority and the most outstanding of the archeological sites in Egypt
date back to the ancient Egyptian history. The knowledge of Egyptology is
essential in delivering a good interpretation in archeological sites in Egypt.
The academic and right information distinguished the professional guide in
Egypt. The next part of this research discussing the relationship between
some issues in Egyptology; how it could affect the improvement of tour
guiding in archeological sites in Luxor.
THE ROLE OF ANCIENT EGYPTIAN LANGUAGE IN TOUR GUIDING
The knowledge of Ancient Egyptian language is a very important skill in
tour guiding in Egyptian archeological sites. Reading the texts is not
enough, but selecting important one is a very elementary factor in guid ing
in an archeological site. It was noted that selection for the guide is a very
important skill; he must be trained to select the most important objects of
interest during his tour (Cohen 1985, 14). This will transform the guide
from pathfinder or original guide to professional guide or mediator; the one
who provide information and interpretations of the site visited (Nettekoven
1979, 142; Cohen 1985, 20). In archeological sites because there are a lot
of scenes and texts, the tour guide or his tutor – through professional
training – his role is to point out the most important of those scenes or
texts.
In Luxor temple an example of selecting an important text to reinforce the
guiding process is to be mentioned here. For Egyptologists Luxor temple is

194

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

a question; with a second temple -Karnak temple- in the north of Luxor we
must ask why; why the same kings in the same city for the same god built
a second temple.
Many Egyptologists tried to answer this question; in his study of the
temple Lanny Bell (Bell 1998) shows that Luxor temple has a different
function than Karnak, and it is related to the worship of the royal ka (soul).
The evidence for this theory is the two seated statues in the first court; the
text on the base of the western seated statue at the southern end of the court
speaks about this special function of the temple, it reads:

Dd mdw in Iwn-mwt.f m n.k dbH htp pri. tw m-bAH it.k nb ntrw n kA-nsw anx ra -nHqAw

A recitation by Inmutef, take to yourself, offering meal, presented in front
of your father , lord of the gods, to the living royal ka, Sun of the rulers
(Sotohy 2016, 54)
This text is the main evidence that the function of Luxor temple is the
worship of the royal ka, so it is a must for the professional tour guide to
make use of it. This text is the main key to understand the function of those
two statues of the deified king, and in this context Luxor temple is
functioning as a royal shrine stressing the importance of the king.
Depending on theses information the guide in Luxor temple; their job is to
maintain and strengthen the attractiveness of the place.
EGYPTOLOGICAL IDEAS ABOUT SELECTED SITES IN LUXOR, AND HOW
THEY AFFECT GUIDING

Regarding guiding interpretation in this academic way, the guide will make
use of all the Egyptological knowledge to show the site in right, academic,
and professional way. In some sites in Luxor the Egyptological knowledge
changes the general – or classical – view of the place, to be presented in
another right way, using a different approach in dealing with scenes, texts,
or architectural features. Here are some examples of how Egyptological
knowledge changes the view in some places, for the benefit of the guide.
K ARNAK
An example of the sacred lake of Karnak is to be mentioned here. The
sacred lake of Karnak is of special importance in the religious practices of
the temple. In the sacred lake area the story of creation was re-enacted, the

195

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

priests showing for the people the Sun-god appeared again on the waves of
the primeval ocean Nun which is now the waters of the sacred lake (Weeks
2005: 101-102, Shaw and Nicholson 2002: 249)
It is here that the guide must link the lake to its ancient function, and refers
to the relation of the lake to the scarab beside it; of course this is a new and
more logic theory about the lake and not to link it with purification, which
is a wrong interpretation. Many academics mention that three thousand
years ago temple priests avoided the lake (Weeks 2005: 101-102), not
because it was polluted, but because religious regulations demanded that
they use fresh, flowing water for their daily ablutions. The priests did row
small sacred barks across the lakes surface on festival days to re-enact the
myth of the lake front of the viewers in festival days.
TEMPLES OF MILLIONS OF YEARS
The site of western Thebes is regarded as one of the most important
archeological sites all over the world; it was one of the first sites listed by
UNESCO as a World Heritage site in 1979 (UNESCO; Strudwick and
Strudwick 1999, 7; Weeks 2001:22). Many temples mark western Theban
topography. Interpreting such a temple in the necropolis of western Thebes
is very important issues which the guide must deal with; because these
temples are architecturally similar to the other temples of eastern Thebes,
so the guide must differentiate between the two types of temples through
their interpretation in order to put western Theban temples in their proper
archeological context.
Western Thebes temples were designated as "mortuary temples", but The
ancient Egyptians had no word for the concept "mortuary temple", Yet
scholars have accepted the meaning of this modem term and they have felt
no need to define it accurately, they were defined as "a royal temple in the
Theban necropolis, near the royal tombs ". But in fact, the ancient
Egyptians' attitudes toward life and death were different from modern ones
(Haeny 1998: 123). An expression that is frequent in texts referring to
temples of the western Theban necropolis temples is "Temples of Millions
of Years" (Haeny 1998: 124).
The purpose of royal "Temples of Millions of Years" was not solely that of
a funerary temple. That function, supplied by priests appointed to serve the
ruler’s cult, both during and after his lifetime on earth, was combined with
several others. The theology of the New Kingdom, as interpreted for the
ruler’s cult, would guarantee the king’s eternal deification and
identification with the sun god and with Osiris. The temple shared the
work of the tombs in the Valley of the Kings where the texts guaranteeing
the king’s rebirth with the solar gods were amplified. While the foreparts

196

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

of the temples celebrated the king's close association with Amen- Ra, in
the deepest sanctuaries the king's identification with Ra and Osiris was
stressed to guarantee his dominion over the heavens and the netherworld
(Bryan 2001: 56).
Temples of millions of years were of great importance for the king more
than just a role in funerary practices. These temples unite kingship with
mortuary practices, they also played a very important role in the Beautiful
Festival of the Valley, which is a reference to the union between living and
dead, between kings and gods. Beside the chapels for the deified king;
these temples contained chapels for gods; namely Amen and the solar cult.
These temples had a very important role in the economy of the State
(Weeks 2005: 144-145).
MEDINET HABU TEMPLE
The special function of the temples of millions of years could be attested in
Medinet Habu temple for the king Ramesses III. According to this view the
temple can be understood through dividing it into three main areas: the
first court, which is the most public part of the temple, while the most
important feature in this court is the "window of appearances" from which
the king appears for the public audiences; the second court, with relieves
showing the celebration of the annual feasts of the underworld gods, Min
and Sokar; and the main temple beyond, a place where those gods reside
or "lived"(Murnane 1999: 581).
The interpretation of the temple must depend on the understanding of the
basic elements in the temple plan and it is the decorative program that is
the best guide to the way in which the temple functioned in ancient times.
Because this is a temple commemorates the defied king, two aspects of the
king are represented within. On the south side, many elements are
associated with the king's mortality and his deification in the underworld;
these themes are evoked by the palace and the "window of appearance"
from which the deified king appears (first court) and the festival of
underworld gods, namely Sokar, a divinity who resides in the underworld
(second court). The king’s divine personality and his identity are
represented on the north side of the building, that is shown in the colossal
royal statues of the northern portico in the first court, and in the festival
scenes in the second court of god Min, which represent a fertility god who
(re)creates himself and thus represent the eternal cycle of nature (Murnane
1999: 581)
The progress of the scenes in the temple is parallel to the progress of the
divine personality of the king now joined the gods as one of them. As the
visitor passes out of the Osiris complex, the figure of the resurrected king

197

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

is virtually the last encountered: in Room 20, on the west wall, we see him
inside a portable shrine, facing out towards the hypostyle. The text front of
him reads:

xa nsw Hr st wrt r mAA nbt qdw m Hwt .f n imy wAst
The king arise in the shrine to see all works (buildings) in his temple which
is in Thebes.The accompanying litany ensures that the name (= essence) of
the king and his mortuary temple will last for the length of eternity:

…(Wsr-mAat-Ra mry-Imn) mi rwD rn n & mw m Hwt sr wr imy Iwnw
…May the name of the King of Upper and Lower Egypt, Ramesses III
flourish
As the name of Atum flourishes in the Mansion of the Prince (law court)
who is in Heliopolis.

…(wsr-mAat-Ra mry-Imn) mi rwD rn n ^w m mnst Hrt m Iwnw
…As the name of Shu flourishes in Upper Menset, in Heliopolis…

rwD rn n Hwt-nTr n sA Ra (Ra-ms-sw HqA-Iwnw)mi n Dt Dt
May the name of the Temple of the Son of Re, Ramesses III, flourish
likewise for ever and ever (Sotohy 2016, 165).
Here in this scene the king is represented re-created again and appears as a
god joined the underworld gods in the necropolis. This state is achieved
through scenes and texts of the temple. This is the scientific interpretation
of an example of the western Theban necropolis temples depending on the
knowledge of Egyptology. An interpretation of the guide must depend on
these academic theories to put the monument in its proper historical and
religious context.
TOMBS OF THE NOBLES

198

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

The fourth example of how the knowledge of Egyptology could enhance
the tour guide performance in an archeological site in Luxor is the
interpretation of the scenes of the tombs of the nobles in western Thebes.
These tombs which were dedicated for the high officials in the Theban
necropolis are known as the “Tombs of the Nobles”. They are the burial
places of the most important personalities of the city during the new
kingdom period. Those are governors, high priests, administrators and their
like. But those tombs were regarded as the place where the spirits of those
people would live after death and also served as a place for their cult,
where offerings would be presented and rituals carried out for the benefit
of the tomb owners. The tomb for the ancient Egyptian helped to
perpetuate the memory its owner, and later it also became a cult place for
certain deities favored by or close to the deceased (Strudwick and
Strudwick 1999: 139).
DECORATION
THE PURPOSE OF THE TOMB DECORATION AND ITS MEANING
The decoration of each tomb could be explained as the way by which the
tomb owner ensures the continued existence of all the things depicted on
the walls. It is noted that the front (offering) chapels of each tomb is the
place where the rites for the tomb owners are depicted, of course the most
important among those rites was the regular supply of food and drink for
the spirit of the deceased. This supply of offerings depicted on walls could
replace the supply of food which is attested in documents show the
agreement which were made between the tomb owner during his life and
his relatives or priests who would look after his tomb and provide offerings
for his spirit (Strudwick and Strudwick 1999: 153).
Another deep understanding of the ordinary daily life scenes in the private
tomb was supposed by Egyptologists. The fishing and fowling scenes in
nobles’ tombs were re-considered by some academics, an explanation
which would enhance the interpretation of those scenes by the tour guide.
THE FISHING AND FOWLING SCENE SYMBOLISM
Fishing scenes is a recurrent theme in private tombs in Thebes, a new
explanation of those scenes was suggested by academics in more than one
place. The theories simply refer to those scenes in religious and mortuary
context; so another interpretation is to be presented for those scenes to
reinforce the understanding of their role for the tomb owner. This is a very
important point where the guide can make use of Egyptology knowledge to
reinforce his interpretation for the nobles’ tombs.

199

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

In fishing and fowling scenes there is a visual play of words symbolising
the rebirth. The visual pun of throwing a stick in the scene is to be equated
with its hieroglyphic sign in the word qmA "to create" and "to beget".
Another word for spearing a fish, sti, resembles the spelling of the word
"impregnate" (Hartwig 2004, 105-106).
The key to a proper understanding of the fishing scenes lies in the
symbolism of the two fishes which are put in the center of each scene, with
the harpoon pointing straight at them so artist here want the seer to focus
on them. The fish in the scenes is tilapia a fish with a curious habit of
swallowing its young fishes when in danger, but spit out them unharmed
once the danger is over. This habit drew the attention of the ancient
Egyptians, they considered the little ones had died, but had been strangely
reborn. This met their own hopes of being reborn after death, and the
tilapia thus became a symbol of rebirth and was connected to Hathor, the
goddess represented fertility and rebirth, because of this mouth-brooding
habits. Also it was connected with the Creator God Atum, who took his
seed in his mouth and spat out the world. Also the brilliant red colour of
the tilapia led to its name "red fish" and connected it with the sun as the
guardian and protector of the solar boat on its daily cycle. The Book of
Dead showed the deceased’s wish to "see the Tilapia (int) in the stream of
turquoise" when sailing with the sun god in his sacred bark (Hartwig 2004:
105; Manniche 1987: 35-36).
The second fish represented in the scene is the Lates or Nile Perch a fish
which was connected to rebirth, and was a symbol for the goddess Neith,
who turned herself into a Lates to could navigate the primeval waters of
Nun.The whole scene is centered on this idea. Fowling was an element into
the whole scene presenting another aspect of the idea of rebirth. Osiris
himself, the ideal example of deceased in ancient Egypt; departed from the
world of the living, then had speech and movement restored to him, and
most specifically his ability to go fowling (Hartwig 2004: 105).
By spearing the Lates and Tilapia fish in the Fishing and Fowling scenes,
the deceased is intended magically taking possession of the cycle of
creation and rebirth, an idea supported by the symbolism of these fish for
recreation. (Hartwig 2004: 105).
A very important symbol in fowling scene is the hunted birds. The
deceased use grey herons as decoys. The heron is a symbol rebirth of the
rising sun and man’s recreation after death. In general, birds were
associated with the enemies of the Creator god; those birds must be
destroyed to preserve the comic order. By killing birds with his throw
stick, the deceased could maintain cosmic order by dispel the forces of

200

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

chaos that could enter the tomb and break his family's eternal peace"
(Hatwig2004: 104).
In the fishing and fowling scene in the tomb of Nakht, Nakht wife is
dressed in a transparent dress that is tied around her breast, she also wears
a broad collar and floral wreath over her wig. In this scene, the wife’s dress
presents her as an alluring symbol of sexuality. The goose on the boat’s
prow is of erotic associations and has a sacred connection to the god
Amun-Re. The pintail ducks that are flying out from the papyrus thicket
also carry sexual symbolism (Hartwig 2004, 105-106).
In the tomb of Menna, the fishing and fowling scene can be read both
literally and symbolically. It represents recreation that occurred during
Menna's life and could help him eternally in the afterlife. In the scene
Menna is represented destroying chaos, represented by the wild birds, this
prevents the evil spirits from entering the tomb to harm those who dwell
in. These images are also erotically charged: the throw stick and the
sensuous clothing of Henuttawy, and erotic place of the marsh dedicated
for the goddess of love, Hathor, all the elements were gathered in the scene
to ease the sexual union of Menna and his wife in the hereafter, which
would lead to their eternal recreation (Hartwig 2013: 83).
EGYPTOLOGY EDUCATION AND TRAINING FOR THE GUIDE
It is noted that the growth and evolution of tourism, specially cultural
tourism, and the different range of roles expected of and played by tour
guides, raised the need for tour guides to gain knowledge and experience
through training, education and professional development (Weiler and
Black 2015a, 134). Effective tour guiding depends on a good education,
continuous training and strong experiences, all these elements beside deep
knowledge of the destinations, lead to a good interpretation of sites
(İrigüler and Güler 2016, 204). Many authors acknowledge the multiple
roles of the guide and note that the relevant skills and knowledge to
perform these roles can be addressed through training and education
(Black 2002; Black and Weiler 2005)
Professional associations and professional certification are the ways that
supposed to achieve these goals. Professional associations can help in
reaching the targeted knowledge for their students and they contribute to
the professionalization of the industry in general, through applying ethical
practices, continuing education, regular recertification or relicensing and
monitoring of standards (Weiler and Black 2015a, 157).
Academic studied the interpretation qualities of tour guides in Egypt and
other developing countries are dissimilar in evaluating the performance of

201

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

the Egyptian tour guides concerning cultural heritage interpretation.
Example of the negative mediation of understanding is McGrath's (2007)
critique of tour guiding of archaeological sites in Peru., like Kohl (2007),
suggests that the role of the guide in developing countries needs to be a
facilitator and broker and not the traditional “show-and-tell” role currently
assumed by guides in many of these countries (Weiler and Black 2015a,
38).
Although El Kilany in her study of the performance of Egyptian tour
guides with UK Tourists, concluded that concerning knowledge most of
the observed Egyptian tour guides were so informative and excellent in
terms of ancient Egyptian civilization (El Kilany E 2010 , 9).
El-Sharkawy (2007) found a shortage among Egyptian tour guides to
perform effectively, who, despite being licensed, lack the relevant
education and knowledge. She studied the effect that this had on their
recognition as a professional tour guide by the relevant tourism authority.
She found that most Egyptian guides did their own research for their tours
and learnt from other experienced guides, but they lacked formal
knowledge and training and suggested that tour guiding courses should be
delivered basically across well-known educational institutions (El
Sharkawy 2007, 90).
The knowledge in general and specially Egyptology can subsidize the
interpretation of the tour guide, especially the knowledge of Egyptology
support the tour guide interpretation for archeological sites in Egypt. At an
individual level, training can increase guides' knowledge of relevant
academic topics, provide and enhance specific skills, and improve a guide's
employment opportunities. This training of Egyptology encourages guides
to solidify their skills and knowledge.
Providing a suitable education and training for tour guides is now of
tourism policy priorities all over the world. Professional education and
training is a must in higher institutions of tourism education where there is
a tour guiding department (Huang and Weiler 2010; Yamada, 2011).
Professional certification is used in Egypt for tour guides to raise guiding
standard and performance. The knowledge of Egyptology is a cornerstone
in study in tour guiding departments. It is noted that certification
establishes minimum standards needed for professional guide. Certification
programs are based on general bases such as communication, leadership,
and interpretation (Black 2013, 223).
The knowledge of Egyptology and training are the most important skills
the Egyptian tour guide must have, in this context; the role of academic

202

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

institutions in fundamental in delivering this knowledge to the future
guides.
CONCLUSION
A link between guiding and the knowledge about the sites in which the
guide works is an essential factor for the success of the tour. The
interpretation of archeological sites is a neglected field of study in tour
guiding literature. Interpretation in fact is crossed with other specialization
than tour guiding, which is the study of the site itself. In Egypt;
Egyptology is the study of archeological sites, a study that is the core of
guides’ in-site interpretation. Academics are entrusted in making solid
relations between scientific theories and practice. This is the case in this
research; it is a try to link the theories of Egyptology to practices of
guiding in Egypt.
The right knowledge of some areas of specialization in Egyptology will
change the guides’ attitude and add professionalism to their work. Ancient
Egyptian language and its use in guiding is a very important but neglected
factor for the uniqueness of the tour guide. The example mentioned in the
research of using a fundamental text from Luxor temple is suitable for
illustrating the effect of the use of the ancient Egyptian language in
guiding. The selected text shows the real function of Luxor temple, it is a
new view opposite to the classic inaccurate ideas about the temple.
Other examples of how to apply Egyptological knowledge in guiding in
sites in Luxor are discussed in other parts. The sacred lake of Karnak
temple is a very important landmark in Luxor. Egyptology gives an
accurate explanation about the function of the lake; a new but right
academic view must be used in guiding to illustrate the right function of
the place. Temples of millions of years and tombs of the nobles in western
Luxor are important landmarks of the city; through Egyptological studies
the guide can interpret these places in more suitable and right way.
It is the work of professional institutions to give the guide the suitable
education and training, and the academics in tour guiding departments in
Egypt are those who are entrusted with delivering such deep knowledge for
the guides to use it in their interpretation of the sites.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ababneh, A. (2018): Tour guides and heritage interpretation: guides’
interpretation of the past at the archaeological site of Jarash,
Jordan, Journal of Heritage Tourism vol. 13, 13:3, 257-

203

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

272.Available online at:http://dx.do i.org/10.108 0/1743873X
.2017.1321003 (Last accessed 7/11/2020).
AL Rawadieh, Z. E. (2015) Tour Guiding and tourist groups conducting
tools. Jordan University
Bell, L. D. 1998. The New Kingdom ‘‘divine temple’’: the example of
Luxor. In B. E. Shafer (ed.), Temples of Ancient Egypt. London
and New York: 127–84.
Black, R. 2002. Towards a model for tour guide certification: An analysis
of the Australian ecoguide program. PhD Thesis, Monash
University.
Black, R. and Weiler, B. 2005. Quality assurance and regulatory
mechanisms in our guiding industry: A systematic review. Journal
of tourism studies 16 (1). 24-37.
Black R. 2013. In pursuit of quality tour guiding: A review of tour guide
quality assurance and regulatory mechanisms. 3rd International
Research Forum on Guided Tours. Breda University of Applied
Sciences, Netherlands.
Bryan B. M. 2001a. Temples of Millions of years in Western Thebes. In
Weeks K. (ed.) Treasures of the valley of the kings Tombs and
temples of The Theban west bank in Luxor. AUC. 54-59.
Cohen. E. 1972 Toward a Sociology of International Tourism. Social
Research 39(2): 164- 182.
Cohen, Erik 1985: The Tourist Guide: The Origins, Structure and
Dynamics of A Role, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 12, 5-29.
EL-Kilany, Engy 2010: Assessing the Intercultural Communication
Performance of Egyptian Tourist Guides with UK Tourists,
Journal of Association of Arab Universities for Tourism and
Hospitality Vol.7, part 1.
El Sharkawy, O.K. (2007) Exploring knowledge and skills for tourist
guides. Evidence from Egypt. Multydisciplinary Journal of
Tourism 2 (2), 77-94.
Hartwig, M. K. 2004. Tomb Painting and Identity in Ancient Thebes,
1419-1372 BCE. Monumenta Aegyptiaca X. Brepols Publishers
n.v., Turnhout, Belgium
Hartwig, M. K. 2013. The Tomb Chapel of menna (TT69). Cairo:
American University in Cairo Press.

204

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

Haeny, G. 1998. New Kingdom mortuary temples and mansions of
millions of years, In Shafer, B. E. (ed.), Temples of Ancient
Egypt, London.
Huang, S. and Weiler, B. (2010) a review and evaluation of China
Assurance system for tour guiding. Journal of Sustainable
Tourism 18 (7), 845-860.
İrigüler f. and Güler M. E. 2016: Tourist Guiding: "Cinderella" of the
Tourism. In Avcikurt C. et al (eds.) Global Issues and Trends in
Tourism. St. Kliment Ohridski University Press. 203-216.
Kohl, J. (2007) Putting the ecotour guide back into context: Using system
thinking to develop quality guides. In R. black and A. Crabtree
(eds) Quality Assurance and Certification in Ecotourism (pp. 337363) Oxford: CAB International.
Manniche L. 1987.City of the Dead. Thebes in Egypt. British museum.
Murnane W. J. 1999. Medinet Habu. In Bard K. A. (ed.) Encyclopedia of
the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt, 578-583. New York.
Maccannell, D. (1976) The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure class.
London: macmillan.
Mcgrath, G. (2007) Towards developing tour guides as interpreters of
cultural heritage: The case of Cuso, peru. In R. black and A.
Crabtree (eds) Quality Assurance and Certification in Ecotourism
(pp. 364-394) Oxford: CAB International.
Murnane W. J. 1999. Medinet Habu. In Bard K. A. (ed.) Encyclopedia of
the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt, 578-583. New York.
Nettekoven. L. 1979: Mechanisms of Intercultural Interaction. In Tourism:
Passport to Development? E. de Kadt. ed. pp. 135- 145. New
York: Oxford University Press
Shaw I. and Nicholson P. 2002. The British museum dictionary of Ancient
Egypt. AUC.
Sotohy H. T. 2016. Reading Ancient Egypt, part one Thebes. Cairo
Strudwick, N. and Strudwick, H. 1999. Thebes in Egypt: A Guide to the
Tombs and Temples of Ancient Luxor. Ithaca. Cornell University
Press.UNESCO World heritage sites: www.unesco.org /whc/
sites/ 87.htm
UNWTO, 2001: United Nations World Tourism Organization. (2001).
Tourism 2020 vision. Madrid: World Tourism Organization.

205

International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Management

Volume 3, Issue 2, December 2020

Van der Merwe, C.D., 2016. Tourist guides’ perceptions of cultural
heritage tourism in South Africa. In: Szymańska, D. and
Biegańska, J. editors, Bulletin of Geography. Socio-economic
Series, No. 34, Toruń: Nicolaus Copernicus University, pp. 117–
130.
Weeks K. R., 2001. Thebes: A model for every city. In Weeks K. R., (ed.)
The treasures of the valley of the kings, tombs and temples of the
Theban west bank in Luxor. 22-33. Cairo.
Weeks K., R., 2005. The illustrated guide to Luxor tombs, temples and
museums, Cairo.
Weiler, B., Black, R. (2015a). Tour Guiding Research, Insights, Issues and
Implications. Aspects of Tourism 62. Bristol, UK: Channel View
publications.
Weiler, B. & Black, R. (2015b). The changing face of the tour guide: oneway communicator to choreographer to co-creator of the tourist
experience, Tourism Recreation Research, 40:3, 364-378
available at:https://doi.org/10.1080/02508281.2015.1083742 (Last
accessed 7/11/2020)
Yamada, N.(2011) Why tour guides is important in ecotourism: enhancing
guiding quality with the ecoutourism promotion policy in Japan.
Asia Pacific journal of TourismResearch 16 (2), 139-152.
Yenipinar U., 2016. Interpretation of Zeugma Museum by Tourist Guides.
In Avcikurt C. et al (eds.) Global Issues and Trends in Tourism.
St. Kliment Ohridski University Press. 73-86.
Zhang, H. Q., & Chow, I. (2004). Application of importance-performance
model in tour guides’ performance: Evidence from mainland
Chinese outbound visitors in Hong Kong. Tourism Management,
25(1), 81-91.

206

