Electronic Guides – An Example
of Application of Information Technologies
in Representation of National Heritage
Stanković, Radomir S; Tatić, Dušan; and Ognjanović, Zoran

Abstract: The impressively fast advent of
information technologies in last decade brought
deep and important changes and improvements in
many areas. Among them, the ways of presenting
information with impact to spreading knowledge
and learning are essentially important for future
development of society and humanity. A part of that
are attempts to improve learning of lectures from
history for its better understanding which should
serve as a foundation for a better tracing and
determination of future developments. For this
purpose information technologies should help in
representation of historical, cultural, natural,
scientific, and technical heritage. In this paper, we
present electronic guides for mobile devices, in
particular tablet PCs and smart phones under
Android and iOS operating systems, as a possible
tool for achieving these goals.
Index Terms: Electronic guides, mobile devices,
Android and iOS operating systems, historical
heritage

INTRODUCTION
Information technologies have brought drastic
changes in the way of representing the information
and related data as well as in their presentation to
the users. To that goal, instead of the written and
printed text, a highly predominant way of
presenting the data and information is enriched by
moving pictures, colors, animations, and sound.
These changes unavoidably affect the way of
noticing, observation, proper understanding, and
registering information. Consequently, the way of
learning is also changed, hopefully improved and
facilitated.
These changes in representation of information
and bringing data to their users affect strongly
arrangement and organization of exhibitions in
museums, galleries, archeological sites, or
_______________________
Manuscript received December 4, 2019. This work was supported
in part by the Project III 44006 of Mathematical Institute of SASA.
Radomir S. Stanković is with Mathematical Institute of SASA,
Belgrade, Serbia (Radomir.Stankovic@gmail.com) contact person.
Dušan Tatić is with Faculty of Electronic Enginering, Niš, Serbia
(dule_tatic@yahoo.com)
Zoran Ognjanović is with Mathematical Insitute of SASA,
Belgrade, Serbia, (zorano@mi.sanu.ac.rs)

architectural complexes, and historical places.
Another
related
issue
is
omnipresent
commercialization of all aspects of the social life.
Due to this, museums are forced to convert from
being state or local community budget supported
institutions into independent, self-financing, and
rather profitable entities.
Thereby, in the fight for increasing the number
of visitors, museums turn towards information
technologies as a tool for preparing attractive,
more complete, visually and additively highly
compelling exhibitions [15].
Another important challenge museums and
similar institutions are facing with is the manner of
attracting young population that is typically more
oriented towards the presence and the future, and
convincing youth to look into past in searching for
proper milestones along the roads to the future.
Very reach and versatile historical heritage on
the territory of Serbia, from prehistory to the recent
past and presence, including certainly the history
of Serbs, imposes necessity of application of
information technologies in preservation and
presentation of this natural, historical, cultural, and
technical richness [7], [8].
In a country in transition, like Serbia, the
economic situation demands that the way of the
usage of information technologies in these areas
should be inexpensive to make them affordable
even for small museums and other related
institutions typically financed by regional or local
communities most of them staying in permanent
financial shortage [4].
As contemporaries of strong attempts towards
revision of history, especially the relatively recent
history of the last century, nullification of
contributions of certain countries, devaluation of
numerous sacrifices of particular nations or ethnic
groups in the fight for liberty and equality,
especially in antiracist and antinazi combat, we
should use information technologies to preserve
and present the historical truth and related data
undistorted.

We can conclude that application of information
technologies in preservation and presentation of
national heritage of Serbia is a very important, but
a challenging multi-dimensional task.
Electronic guides presented in this paper are an
example of software products that satisfy most of
the above mentioned criteria and, therefore, could
be possibly recommended for application in
presentation of national historical, natural, cultural,
scientific, and technical heritage. Several
applications that are already in application by few
museums in Serbia confirm their effectiveness.
From the creativity induction methods point of view
summarized in [2], the presented solution includes
elements of several of them, but it might be stated
that transdisciplinary is certainly prevalent. The
presentation in this paper is organized by following
as much as it was possible the template for writing
articles of this kind specified in [3].
ELECTRONIC GUIDE
Electronic guide is an application for mobile
devices as tablet PCs and smart phones. They
can be used to navigate a user through either indoor exhibitions in museums, galleries, fair halls,
or across open sky museums, archaeological
sites, ethnographic parks, and old town centers as
a place of architectural and historical heritage.
Electronic guide presented in this paper has
been developed as a part of research work within
a project in digitalization in culture conducted by
the Mathematical Institute of SASA in Belgrade,
Serbia [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14].
This electronic guide (eGuide) can be viewed as
an advanced and upgraded version of classical
audio guides commonly used in many museums.
The advancement consists in increasing the
functionality.
An eGuide consists of the following modules
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Geographical map,
Gallery of photographs,
Textual information,
Audio records,
Video records,
Interactive 3D models,
Augmented Reality (AR) module.

An important feature of eGudies is that they
ensure independence of the user of a professional
visitor guide which usually offers a standard
amount of information about certain selected
artefacts or other objects of interest offered within
an exhibition or along a touristic route. This
information is adapted to an average visitor in the

sense of age of visitors, their education, previous
knowledge on the subject, level of interest, etc.
Compared to the typical speech a professional
guide usually deliver to the visitors, an eGuide
offers a considerably enlarged amount of
information and the user is free to select topics of
his particular interest to be better informed about.
It is even more important that the visitor becomes
an active creator of the exhibition devoted
exclusively to himself by selecting the topics about
which he wants to be better informed depending
on his particular interest. In this way, the visitor
takes an active role, instead of being a passive
observer of artefact and listener of a standardized
talk. Further, the information a visitor can get
through the eGuide is certainly more complete,
presented in an attractive way, more compelling
and easier to accept, learn, and remember. This
probably especially applies to 3D reconstructions,
where the visitor is able to see the missing parts
or complete digital computer generated
reconstructions of various objects, either small
like, for example, jewelry to grandiose
architectural objects.
1.

Module Map

This module is intended to navigate the visitor
to the places of his personal interest. It is
implemented as a standard plug-in establishing
connection to the Google Map and providing all
related information as this service. The user is
navigated to the points of interest marked at the
map from either its current position, center of the
town, central bus or railway station, or possibly the
nearest airport.
2.

Gallery of Photographs

This module contains a set of selected
photographs with enabled both pitch and
incremental zoom. To each photo a caption and
the order number is assigned. A compromise
should be made between the total size of the
application and the number of photographs and
their resolution. If many photographs should be
presented, some of them can be included in the
application while the other are download from a
server.
3.

Text

Text is the simplest way to convey the
information and therefore it is provided. This is
certainly necessary for users with reduced
auditory abilities. Attempts are made to provide
concise texts, however, scrolling across the text is
provided, or alternatively the option Read more.

4.

Audio Module

Many visitors do not like to read while standing
at the front of artefacts in exploring a museum,
gallery or an archaeological site. They prefer to get
information through an audio record.
5.

figure, AR-module is used to project mosaics
hidden under the sand for conservation reasons
and, therefore, invisible for visitors. In this case, a
purposely generated pattern is used as a marker
for recognition by the AR-module.

Video Module

This module enables projecting various video
records on the screen of the mobile device that are
intended to provide additional visual information
about the subject of interest. Depending on the
profile of the museum, and especially for the open
sky museums or archaeological sites, eGuides
include video recorded by a drone and panoramic
views. Since video files are usually large, in most
of the applications this video material is not a part
of the applications, and it is rather streamed from
the server. Alternatively, a corresponding link to
the YouTube is provided. See Figure 4, and
related description bellow for an example.
Upon request by the museum authorities, a
video with text interpreted in Sign language for
users with disabilities can be attached and
projected [1]. An example is the eGuide entitled
Old Knjaževac in the list of applications by the
ARhiMedia group.
6.

Interactive 3D Models

In some cases, and in particular for
representation of historical and architectural
heritage, 3D models offer a very informative and
also attractive way of informing the user. In the
presented eGuide, it is usually provided a gallery
of interactive 3D models, in the sense that they
can be pitch or incrementally scaled and rotated.
This is often used for 3D reconstructions of
objects, buildings, and similar artefacts.
These 3D models are further used in many
cases and whenever appropriate as a basis for
virtual walks.
7.

Figure 1. Recognition of a computer generated marker to
project the photo of a mosaic covered by sand for conservation
purposes at the Archaeological Park Mediana, near Niš,
Serbia.

Another example from the same application is
shown in Fig. 2, where a 3D model of a fountain is
projected on the place where supposedly it was
located in the audience hall of the Roman emperor
Konstantin the Great. Recall that Mediana was a
summer palace of this Roman emperor who was
born in Niš. In this case, a part of the mosaic is
used as a marker for the AR-module. Idea is to not
affect integrity of a monument, in this case a
mosaic, by inserting an artificially created object
as a marker.

AR-Module

This module is intended to provide additional
information through various audio-visual effects
obtained by inserting computer generated objects
into the image captured by the camera of a mobile
device.
Augmented objects could be text, audio
records, images, 3D models, or video records.
Fig. 1 illustrates an application of the ARmodule from the eGuide for the archaeological site
Mediana, near the city of Niš in Serbia. In this

Figure 2. A part of the mosaic as a marker for projection of a
3D model of a fountain.

Figure 3. Facade of a building as a marker for AR-module in
eGuide.

Figure 3, illustrates the case from the eGuide
Industrial Heritage of Paraćin [6], a city in Serbia.
In this case, the marker for recognition is the
facade of a building.
Figure 4 shows another illustrative example of the
application of AR-module in eGuides. In this
example, again facade is used as a marker, and
links to two YouTube items are provided. This
historical building, presently a hotel, served in the
Second World War as the head quarter of the
German Army where the plan for the airborn
assault known as the Raid on the city of Drvar in
Bosnia was elaborated to arrest or kill the partisan
leader Tito, who later become the president of
former Socialistic Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
A mosaic in this building the photo of which is
included into the Gallery of photographs,
motivated the name of this war operation
Rösselsprung [5].

Figure 4. Facade as a marker and links to YouTube videos
related to the subject.

Scenes are defined by the parameters embedded
into an XML configuration file which enables
dynamic content creation. Dynamic content
concerns text, images, video, audio and 3D
models.
For instance, module map is defined with the
parameters for location (longitude and latitude) of
important places. Also, route creation is generated
using these parameters. Gallery of photographs
and video player module embeds the multimedia
material using the XML file. The AR-module is
based on the application of Easy AR engine which
fully supports the Unity 3D engine.
In addition, a variety of other software is used
for image, audio and video processing, and
editing, compression, and other manners of
adaptation of the contents for efficient projecting
on mobile devices.
INSTALLATION OF EGUIDES

IMPLEMENTATION TECHNOLOGIES
The ARhiMedia group realizes eGuides by
using the Unity 3D engine since it is a crossplatform game engine allowing exporting the
application for mobile devices working under
either Android or iOS operating systems. Each
module is a separate Scene in the Unity project.

Since eGuides are developed as a result of the
research work on a project supported by the
Ministry
of
Science
and
technological
development of Serbia, they are freely accessible
on Google Play for Android and APP Store for iOS
based mobile devices, respectively.
A concrete application can be accessed
searching by its name on these repositories, or
directly from a link provided by the cultural

institution or given to the user by somebody. A
typical way is that a poster with a QR-code
assigned to the application is posted at some
appropriate place near the entrance. The visitor
gets the application by reading the QR-code.

INSTEAD OF CONCLUSION
Fig. 5 shows an example of a poster to
download the eGuide for the Museum in Orašac,
a chapter of the Museum in Arandjelovac, Serbia.
The reader of this article is welcome to read the
QR-code to get the application, and then start the
AR-module and use the pictures at the poster as
markers. The exhibition presents speeches in the
year 1804 of leaders of Serbian rebels against the
five centuries long occupation by the Ottoman
Empire.

Figure 5. Example of a poster with QR-code to download the eGuide for the Muzeum in Orašac.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

Baker, E.J., Bakar, J.A.A, Zulkifli, A.N., “Mobile
augmented reality elements for museum hearing
impaired visitors’ engagement”, Journal of
Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer
Engineering (JTEC), Vol. 9, No. 2-12, 2017, 171178.
Blagojević,V.,et al,"A systematic approach to
generation of new ideas for PhD research in
computing", Advances in Computers, Elsevier,Vol.
104, 2016, 1-19.
Banković, M., et al,"Teaching graduate students
how to review research papers", Advances in
Computers, Elsevier,Vol 120, 2020, 1-17.
Djukić, A., Antonić, B., Stanković, R.S., Tatić, D.,
„Digital Mini-museum as an Innovative and
Affordable Presentation of Local Heritage for
Tourists: Example from Serbia“, Proc. of the 3rd
International Conference on Tourism and Business
2019, Mahidol University International College,
Thailand, August 2019., 1-11
Eyre, W. D., Operation Rösselsprung and the
elimination of Tito, May 25, 1944 – a failure in
planning and intelligence support, The Journal of
Slavic Military Studies, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2006, 343376.
Hristina, M., Radonjić Živkov, E., Privreda Paraćina
od mlina do savremene industrije, Zavičajni muzej
Paraćin, 2018. ISBN: 978-86-920553-1-7
Stanković, R. S., Tatić, D., Tatić, D., Jovanović, N.,
„Digitalni muzej u Niškoj tvrđavi - Primer primene
informacionih
tehnologija
u
predstavljanju
nacionalne baštine“, Četrnaesta nacionalna
konferencija
sa
međunarodnim
učešćem
Digitalizacija nacionalne baštine, starih zapisa iz
prirodnih i društvenih nauka i digitalna humanistika,
Beograd, 29 September 2016., 16, ISBN: 978-867589-111-6
Tatić, D., Stanković, R.S., Stojanović, J., Jovanović,
M., „Application of Information Technologies in
Presentation of Historical Heritage of Niš“,
Proceedings of Conference Digitalization of
Cultural Heritage in Niš Region, May 2019, Niš,
Serbia, 47-52,

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Tatić, D., Stanković, R., Stojanović, J., Jovanović,
M., „Universal Electronic Guide for Museum
Exhibitions“,
Proceedings
of
Conference
Digitalization of Cultural Heritage in Niš Region,
Niš, Serbia, 54-62.
Tatić, D., Stanković, R. S., Vitanović, N., Živković,
N., Jovanović N., Stojanović, J., „Softversko rešenje
za multimedijalne prezentacije arhitektonske
nacionalne baštine (MMPAB)“, Tehničko rešenje,
Sednica Naučnog veća Matematičkog instituta
SANU, Beograd, 25. februara 2019.…
Tatić, D., Stanković, R. S., Jovanović, N.,
Stojanović,
J.,
„Softversko
rešenje
za
multimedijalnu podršku prezentacije arheoloških
lokaliteta (MMPAL)“, Tehničko rešenje, Sednica
Naučnog veća Matematičkog instituta SANU,
Beograd, 25. februara 2019.
Tatić, D., Stanković, R. S., Jovanović, N.,
Stojanović,
J.,
„Softversko
rešenje
za
multimedijalno predstavljanje istorijske nacionalne
baštine (MMPIB)“, Tehničko rešenje, Sednica
Naučnog veća Matematičkog instituta SANU,
Beograd, 25. februara 2019.
Tatić, D., Jovanović, N., Tatić, D., Stanković, R.,
Ognjanović, Z., „A case study of the usage of
information technologies and mobile devices by
visitors in museum environments“, The Fifteenth
National Conference Digitization of Cultural
Heritage, Old Records from the Natural and Social
Sciences and Digital Humanities, Faculty of
Mathematics, University of Belgrade, Beograd, str.
23, 2017., ISBN: 978-86-7589-121-5, M64.
Tatić, D., Vitanović, N., Stevanović, K., Živković, N.,
Jovanović, N., Stanković, R. S., Ognjanović, Z.,
“Universal electronic guide developed in Unity
environment”, The Fifteenth National Conference
Digitization of Cultural Heritage, Old Records from
the Natural and Social Sciences and Digital
Humanities, Faculty of Mathematics, University of
Belgrade, Beograd, str. 24 , 2017., ISBN: 978-867589-121-5
Tsai, H. and Sung, K., 2012, “Mobile applications
and museum visitation”, Computer, Vol. 45, No. 4,
95-98.

