Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Heritage/cultural attraction
atmospherics: Creating the right
environment for the heritage/cultural
visitor
Jenny Cave, Mark A. Bonn, Jenny Cave
Journal of Travel Research

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

Incorporat ing t he winescape int o t he t heory of planned behaviour: Examining ‘new world’ wine…
Ben T homas
Visit ors t o Maurit ius-Place, Percept ions and Det erminant s of Repeat Visit at ion
girish prayag
T HE DET ERMINANT S OF SAT ISFACT ION OF T OURIST AT T RACT IONS’ VISIT ORS
Marek Nowacki

Journal of Travel Research
http://jtr.sagepub.com

Heritage/Cultural Attraction Atmospherics: Creating the Right Environment for the Heritage/Cultural
Visitor
Mark A. Bonn, Sacha M. Joseph-Mathews, Mo Dai, Steve Hayes and Jenny Cave
Journal of Travel Research 2007; 45; 345
DOI: 10.1177/0047287506295947
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://jtr.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/45/3/345

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Travel and Tourism Research Association

Additional services and information for Journal of Travel Research can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://jtr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://jtr.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations (this article cites 6 articles hosted on the
SAGE Journals Online and HighWire Press platforms):
http://jtr.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/45/3/345#BIBL

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

Heritage/Cultural Attraction Atmospherics:
Creating the Right Environment for the
Heritage/Cultural Visitor
MARK A. BONN, SACHA M. JOSEPH-MATHEWS, MO DAI, STEVE HAYES, AND JENNY CAVE

The popular press is replete with articles discussing the
various remodeling efforts afoot in many of the prominent
heritage attractions worldwide. Undoubtedly, museum curators have acknowledged the tremendous role external surroundings can play in the overall experience of the heritage
visitor. This study investigates the effect of some basic environmental elements on visitors to heritage sites, illustrating
that the heritage attraction’s physical environment plays an
important role in determining both visitors’ attitude toward
the heritage attraction and future repatronage intentions, as
well as their willingness to recommend the experience to
friends and relatives. The study findings indicate that environmental cues can be used as a differential tool to perpetuate brand meaning and uniqueness in the minds of the
consumer, thereby creating a competitive advantage for the
heritage attraction.
Keywords: heritage/cultural tourism; museums; museum
design; atmospherics; service environment;
physical environment; heritage attractions

INTRODUCTION
The world tourism market has evolved to one in which
there are several coexisting niche markets for the potential
visitor. Holiday destinations have gone way beyond the
traditional three S’s of sun, sea, and sand to a wider, much
more diverse market offering (Boyd 2002). Within this context, it is no surprise that the modern-day visitor faced with
all of these choices and options has also evolved into a much
more sophisticated creature, interested in specific niches and
specialties within the travel and tourism sector.
Within such a competitive tourism marketplace, it is
inevitable that every destination/attraction will search for
various ways to differentiate its product and services from
those of its key competitors. A critical component in this differentiation is the creation of a unique brand identity and
image. This need for uniqueness has been heightened due to
the growing interest by travelers to visit environments that
can be considered exotic and different. It is this desire that
has fueled the recent growth of the ecotourism market of the
mid-1980s and beyond (Ayala 1996).

The ecotourism niche market is not, however, the only
sector that has benefited from a change in traveling tastes,
because the late 1990s has witnessed a renewed interest in
travelers to rediscover the past (Boyd 2002). This fascination with historical attractions has led to the generation of a
niche market defined as cultural and heritage tourism in
which reliving the past has become a critical tourist experience. Moreover, a body of literature has developed that suggests that heritage tourism is one of the fastest growing
tourism sectors, (e.g., Capstick 1985; Mooney-Melvin 1991;
Poria, Butler, and Airey 2004).
Heritage tourism focuses on a destination’s historic, natural, and cultural value (Boyd 2002), and goes beyond a
simple interest in the past. According to Boyd (2002), heritage and cultural tourism encompasses a wide variety of
landscapes and settings; it explores the cultural and natural
heritages of peoples, highlighting natural physical beauty,
urban and industrial developments, as well as historical
landmarks. In some instances, destination promoters focus
on the architecture and built heritage, such as churches, castles, government buildings, and so on. This type of heritage
tourism is commonplace in many European nations. In other
locations, the heritage tourism focus is on archeological significance and the history of ethnic groups, as is the case in
Canada. For some countries such as Australia and New
Zealand, heritage and cultural tourism focuses more on the
natural environment and surrounding beauty, although in
other heritage tourism destinations, cultural attractions such
as museums and performing arts centers define their cultural
and heritage tourism product.

Mark A. Bonn is the Robert H. Dedman Professor in Services
Management at the Dedman School of Hospitality, College of
Business, Florida State University, in Tallahassee. Sacha M. JosephMathews is an assistant professor at the Eberhardt School of
Business, University of the Pacific, in Stockton, California. Mo Dai
is a research manager for Bonn Marketing Research Group, Inc., in
Tallahassee, Florida. Steve Hayes is the executive vice president of
the Tampa Bay Convention & Visitors Bureau in Tampa, Florida.
Jenny Cave is a lecturer and doctoral candidate in the Department
of Tourism and Hospitality Management at Waikato Management
School, University of Waikato, in Hamilton, New Zealand.
Journal of Travel Research, Vol. 45, February 2007, 345-354
DOI: 10.1177/0047287506295947
© 2007 Sage Publications

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

346

FEBRUARY 2007

With such a wide range of attractions, it is no surprise
that the World Tourism Organization estimates that 37% of
all trips today include a visit to a cultural/heritage attraction,
including museums, conservatories, zoos, aquariums, galleries, performing arts centers, reservation sites, historical
monuments, buildings, and cemeteries, to name a few (Boyd
2002). But what makes one museum different from another?
What sets apart one monument or historical building from
its counterpart? And what defines a specific archeological
site or natural park as being unique? Undoubtedly, the significance of one cultural or historical attraction/site (hereafter referred to as attraction) over another is very personal
and idiosyncratic. Each visitor is looking for a specific set of
attributes and characteristics in an attraction. As a result,
each attraction must find the emotional uniqueness that
makes it appealing to specific visitors. This emotional
uniqueness can serve as a form of competitive differentiation for that specific attraction.
Fundamental to this differentiation are the image and
perception customers have of individual attractions.
Ultimately, the image creation process becomes critical to
visitors’ final impressions. In many instances, this image
creation is achieved through the direct manipulation of environmental stimuli both inside and outside the heritage
attraction itself. For example, a museum’s architecture and
interior design represent its public image, and establish the
framework for the visitor’s experience. At the same time,
however, the architecture fulfills a multiplicity of functions
including security and storage, fire detection and prevention,
crowd control, traffic flow, lighting, and microclimates
(Sirefman 1999). In essence, an attraction’s physical characteristics can facilitate a physical encapsulation of its emotional persona. It is therefore understandable that many of
today’s attractions have allocated a significant amount of
resources to developing spaces that create a multipurpose
interior with an impressive exterior to present an eclectic
mix of past legacies and future potential.
This new direction has not gone unnoticed, because
empirical research has found that improved physical surroundings can affect the bottom line. Tourism research indicates a direct correlation between physical renovations and
higher patronage figures (Barbieri 2004; Sirefman 1999).
The increased revenues generated from these aesthetically
pleasing additions render support to attractions and also
generate tourist expenditures by attracting nonresident visitors (Dietsch 1997). For example, the Cézanne exhibit at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art generated an estimated $86.5
million from out-of-town visitors alone, which comprised
more than 80% of the museum’s clientele for the exhibition.
In many instances, the advantages of exterior and interior
surroundings have gone largely uninvestigated in the cultural
and heritage tourism academic literature. Most of the existing
work on the commercial impact of physical improvement
exists in the marketing and environmental psychology literature (e.g., Baker 1986; Bitner 1992; Davis 1984; Mehrabian
and Russell 1974). Despite the obvious implications for
tourism as a whole and heritage tourism in particular, the
role of the physical environment on repeat patronage and
increased visitation numbers has been limited in the tourism
and hospitality arena. Most of the current literature in this area
has focused on the environmental cues that specifically affect
destination image. This research primarily explored the link
between very general environmental cues such as scenery,

amenities, and hygiene factors and how these cues can affect
visitor perceptions (Bonn, Joseph, and Dai 2005; Echtner and
Richie 1991; Gartner 1989, 1993; Mazanec 1994).
This study seeks to add to the tourism and hospitality literature on three major levels. First, it examines the role of
physical environment/atmospherics within a predominantly
heritage tourism context. The goal here is to explore how
consumers feel about specific heritage-related atmospheric
elements. Second, the study examines the relationship
between specific atmospheric elements commonplace at
various attractions and the visitor’s overall attitude toward
the attraction as well as his or her image perception of the
attraction. Finally, the third contribution to the literature
seeks to assess the relationship between an attraction’s use
of atmospherics and a visitor’s intention to return/recommend that attraction to others.

CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND
Heritage Tourism
Heritage and cultural tourism encompasses visiting a
number of cultural- or heritage-oriented facilities, including museums, aquariums, performing arts centers, archeological digs, theaters, historical sites, monuments, castles,
architectural relics, religious centers, and even zoos. Various
researchers have acknowledged the wide dichotomy of attractions considered to be heritage/cultural tourism sites or attractions (e.g., Boyd 2002; Poria, Butler, and Airey 2003). From
natural parks to archeological sites, each type of attraction has
its own unique combination of benefits and advantages; some
focus more on the historical aspect, some on the cultural, and
others mix geographic and heritage elements. Traditionally,
many attractions that engage in cultural/heritage tourism were
either houses for specimens in jars or repositories for rare and
remarkable objects/paintings, with a clear mission to safeguard the nation’s “antiquities” (Cook 2001). In the performing arts, the orientation was still centered on patrons looking
on at the performers as opposed to interacting with them.
Recently, many cultural/heritage attractions and sites
have undergone a type of reformation. The past decade has
seen an important paradigm shift for many of these types of
attractions, transforming them into places of instruction and
educational centers, as opposed to display houses (Cook
2001). Researchers have discovered that the educational
component is a significant motivation for visitors to heritage
sites, and this information has caused a paradigm shift for
many heritage attractions worldwide (Poria, Butler, and
Airey 2004). These visionary changes have led to many
attractions adopting a more scientific and technological
focus, evolving into interactive multisensory exhibits in
which multimedia displays are the norm and visitors come
to participate and interact, rather than simply look at
exhibits and read the associated notation.
For example, at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and
Museum in Cleveland, visitors can listen to numerous rockand-roll classics by the mere touch of a screen. At the Bath
Museum in Bath, England, visitors can take an audio tour of
the facility by using a headset that carries the tour in multiple
languages for visitors (Zeppel 1996). In Florida, IMAX
theaters have focused their efforts on becoming technological centers, using technology and cinematography to educate

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

JOURNAL OF TRAVEL RESEARCH 347

younger audiences on nature, industrial heritage, and culture.
Similarly, aquariums throughout central and south Florida
have invested considerable resources to educate audiences on
aquatic life throughout the state.
Increased competition for visitor dollars has prompted
many twenty-first-century heritage attractions to assume a
more aggressive marketing campaign. Curators and managers
are continuously seeking new ways to satisfy and delight
visitors. This new impetus has generated a host of largescale renovations involving millions of dollars and drastic
interior and exterior changes. Currently, heritage attractions
are undergoing renovations ranging from new lighting and
sound methods, to larger spaces and the inclusion of interactive displays (Cash 2004). For example, the Brooklyn
Museum completed a $63 million improvement plan in 2004,
and Cincinnati’s Taft Museum of Art recently reopened after
spending $22.8 million in renovations (Art Business News
2004). These sizeable investments are undertaken in an effort
to create the “ideal” emotional atmosphere for the visitor and
by extension the “ideal” emotional image for the heritage
attraction.
A major part of creating this “ideal” experience lies in
creating the right atmosphere or physical environment in
which to view the display, exhibit, or attraction. Ultimately,
the exterior and interior designs of an attraction’s space
become fundamental in shaping the attraction’s identity as
well as its patronage. The above discussion highlights the
benefits of having a more enticing space. The following discussion explores the specifics of a pleasing physical environment within a heritage/cultural attraction context.

The Physical Environment
Environmental psychologists suggest that people react to
their environment in two basic ways: approach and avoidance
(Mehrabian and Russell 1974). Approach behaviors include
positive behaviors such as a desire to stay, explore, spend
money, and browse in a particular environment. Avoidance, on
the other end of the spectrum, includes negative behaviors such
as a desire not to stay, explore, or affiliate with a particular
environment. Throughout the literature, employees and customers alike have been proven to function in, and relate better
to, an environment they perceive to be aesthetically pleasing.
The relevance to the heritage and cultural tourism arena
is no less significant. The existing academic work in other
literature streams on the use of environmental or atmospheric elements to enhance the consumer’s experience will
be used to illustrate its direct applicability to heritage and
cultural tourism. The following discussion will seek to
explore the significant return on investment that heritage
attraction managers could receive if expenditures committed
to remodeling and refurbishing heritage attractions were
used with the specific goal of enhancing visitor experiences.
The implications here to heritage/cultural tourism lie in the
fact that all of these attractions are very often marketed as a
specific brand name. Carnegie Hall, San Diego Zoo,
Rockefeller Center for the Performing Arts, and IMAX theaters: each of these has specific brand meaning in the eyes
of the consumer, and as such, protection of these meanings
is critical to positive evaluations and lasting positive associations for both past and potential visitors. It is in this light
that the facility’s atmospherics becomes critical in shaping
individual brand attitude evaluations.

Atmospherics
Atmospherics is defined by Kotler (1973) as the effort to
design buying environments that enhance consumer purchase
probability. Some of these environmental elements have been
examined in great detail to understand their impact on consumer behavior. For example, clutter has been positively
linked to avoidance and negatively linked to satisfaction
(Bitner 1990). Color has been linked to approach (consumer
liking) and positive perceptions of products or merchandise
(Bellizzi, Crowley, and Hasty 1983). Crowding has been
shown to change a consumer’s satisfaction, enjoyment of the
shopping environment, and use of in-store information
(Eroglu and Machleit 1990; Harrell, Hutt, and Anderson
1980). Store music has been shown to influence the amount
of time consumers spend in stores, traffic flow, sales, arousal,
and the perception of visual stimuli in the retail store (e.g.,
Dube, Chebat, and Morin 1995; Milliman 1982; Yalch and
Spagenberg 1993). Other physical factors such as layout and
design (Smith and Burns 1996) and in-store lighting (Baker,
Grewal, and Parasuraman 1994) have all been shown to affect
consumer behavior in some form or fashion.
The relevance to the heritage/cultural attraction’s physical environment is limitless. In this context, the significant
revenues attributed to renovations and expansions seem justifiable. Past research has pointed to the relationship
between the service environment and the overall perceived
service quality (Baker et al. 2002; Bitner 1992; Brady and
Cronin 2001). There is also, however, significant research
that links specific atmospheric elements to very specific
consumer behavior. When visitors are drawn to the attraction’s environment, the experience can directly affect positive evaluations of the products/displays and ultimately lead
to positive attitudes to the heritage facility and/or greater
likelihood of repatronage intentions (Obermiller and Bitner
1984). Thus, if clutter has been linked to avoidance, will a
more open, spacious environment entice visitors to explore
an exhibit? If in-house music has been shown to influence
the subsequent perceptions of visual stimuli, would the same
exhibit shown in different spaces alongside different background sounds result in different perceptions and evaluations? The big question is What environmental elements
used by heritage/cultural attractions or facilities have the
most significant impact? Which elements are critical, and
which add only minor value?
Atmospherics can be manipulated to create lasting brand
meaning in the eyes of consumers (Baker 1986; Bitner 1986,
1992; Booms and Bitner 1982; Kotler 1973; Shostack
1977). Consequently, heritage tourism professionals can
fashion specific brand images/perceptions through direct
manipulation of atmospherics. Spacious product displays,
lighting, sounds, power aisles, and bold clear signage can
each be manipulated to create a unique experience for the
consumer. These unique experiences can in turn contribute
to an overall positive consumer response, which can manifest itself in positive purchase behavior (Dietsch 1997).
As an example to the challenged faced by today’s managers, a research study conducted by Tian, Crompton, and
Witt (1996) documented that more than 40% of all museum
visitors were initially reluctant to visit the facility and only
participated based on external pressures from friends or
family members. With this in mind, managers of heritage
and cultural attractions are eager to use any additional tools

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

348

FEBRUARY 2007

that could contribute to the overall experience of the visitor
and ensure that his or her experience is a favorable one.
Positive evaluations by individual consumers can facilitate
recommendations to potential visitors. This is the concept of
repurchase intentions that is so commonly referred to in the
retailing arena yet limited in the tourism literature. Extant
literature tells us that atmospherics or the service environment is a significant contributor to repurchase intentions and
positive recommendations from consumers.
Our research suggests that interior design and atmospheric
elements are providing the perceptions and mental images customers take with them that would affect their intent to recommend or revisit. Managers can therefore use atmospherics as a
virtual metaphor to convey image, manipulate attitudes, or
assist in the recall of existing positive attitudes. Attraction
managers can manipulate exterior and interior design, as well
as the overall atmospherics, to act as differentiating tools in
their marketing and promotions. Baker (1986) established an
academic framework to contextualize the various atmospheric
elements at work in a consumption environment using her
Stimulus-Organism-Response (SOR) paradigm. The following discussions transfer this paradigm to a heritage/cultural
tourism context.

create calm and comfort, thereby allowing the visitor to
better focus on the display at hand.
In the marketing and environmental psychology fields,
researchers have found linkages between atmospherics and
consumers’ overall attitude toward a particular brand and
intention to repurchase (Obermiller and Bitner 1984). In the
context of heritage/cultural tourism, we seek to demonstrate
the link between specific atmospheric elements and specific
visitor behavior. Each of these elements that affect the
ambiance and mood of an environment can help to improve
the visitor experience while visiting a specific attraction.
These positive experiences can in turn affect whether a patron
will recommend this attraction to others or revisit the facility
themselves in the future, or even affect his or her overall
impression/attitude of the attraction. As a result, we propose
the following hypotheses:

SOR Paradigm

Layout and Design

Traditionally, atmospheric elements have been categorized
along two main schools of thought, Baker (1986) and Bitner
(1992). Baker (1986) first introduced the categorization of instore atmospherics through her SOR grouping system. She
renamed atmospherics the “service environment” and categorized the “elements” into three groups: design factors (layout,
color, and clutter), social factors (persons within the store environment such as employees and shoppers), and ambient factors (nonvisual cues such as scent, sound, and lighting). All of
these dimensions represent physical elements that connote
both explicit and implicit cues that serve as communicators to
the users (Eroglu, Machleit, and Davis 2001). Bitner (1992)
extended the SOR paradigm to three new groups of atmospherics, based on a slightly different categorization, in which
the last dimension was changed to encompass signs symbols
and artifacts. For the purposes of this study, however, we will
be using Baker’s (1986) conceptualization.

The second dimension deals with layout and design functionality. In the heritage/cultural attraction context, this would
encompass atmospheric elements that aid in ease of movement and location of in-house displays and exhibits. It also
deals with the actual design of the exhibits themselves.
Tourist attractions of this nature use several elements to
improve the visitor’s experience such as interactive displays,
technological designs (i.e., big-screen displays, interactive
kiosks, and interactive panels at displays), and educational
games to enhance the design of the actual exhibit.
All of these elements can affect the extent to which a visitor enjoys the experience or is disappointed by the visit.
Everything from traffic flow and display location to design,
aisle space, and seating can affect how much a visitor enjoys
a specific visit. Poor aisle space can facilitate crowding and a
lack of flow. Bad layout can cause confusion and fatigue, and
even turn off a visitor from seeing all of the attractions or staying for an entire show. Poor seating arrangements can diminish sales, frustrate visitors, and create bad impressions. Based
on the various possible linkages between layout and design
atmospheric elements and consumer behavior, we propose the
following hypotheses:

Ambiance
The first dimension deals with atmospherics that affect
the five senses and set the tone or “ambiance” of an environment. These include attributes such as lighting, music,
noise, temperature, signage, and wall color. Atmospherics
that affect sight senses involve designs that use colors, typesetting, and graphics to convey the image a manager would
like to project about the attraction. In the case of heritage
attractions, managers can manipulate wall color, signage,
and mood lighting to ensure that visitors enjoy their cultural
experience. These elements can emphasize certain characteristics in a display or bring out the mystique in castles.
Sound can also be used to set the mood and create ambiance.
Elements that affect sound senses such as music can create
romance or nostalgia, or even help recreate historical
moments in time. Similarly, temperature that addresses
touch/feel senses can be used to recreate environments or

Hypothesis 1a: Ambient environmental factors positively affect attitude toward a heritage attraction.
Hypothesis 1b: Ambient environmental factors positively affect a visitor’s intention to revisit.
Hypothesis 1c: Ambient environmental factors positively
affect word-of-mouth intentions.

Hypothesis 2a: Layout and design environmental factors
positively affect attitude toward a heritage attraction.
Hypothesis 2b: Layout and design environmental factors
positively affect a visitor’s intention to revisit.
Hypothesis 2c: Layout and design environmental factors
positively affect word-of-mouth intentions.

Social
The third dimension encompasses the elements pertaining to both visitors and employees involved in the tourism
experience. The social environment looks at how courteous
and knowledgeable the employees are while at the same

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

JOURNAL OF TRAVEL RESEARCH 349
FIGURE 1
MODEL OF HERITAGE/CULTURAL TOURISM ATMOSPHERICS

SOR Paradigm
Attitude towards the
Heritage /Cultural
Attraction

H1a-S
Ambiance Service
Environment
H1b-S

H3a-S

H2a-S

Intention to Revisit the
Heritage/Cultural
Attraction

H2b-S

Design and Layout
Service Environment
H2c-S

H1c-S

H3b-S
Social Service
Environment

H3c-NS

Word of Mouth
Intentions

Note: NS = not significant; S = significant.

time examining how much other visitors affect the experience. In a cultural/heritage setting, these elements are no
different from those in the retailing sector. It encompasses
how knowledgeable the service providers are and how
informed the other visitors are. It examines how similar each
visitor perceives the other visitors to be to them and how
courteous they consider the service staff to be.
Hypothesis 3a: Social environmental factors positively
affect attitude toward a heritage attraction.
Hypothesis 3b: Social environmental factors positively
affect intention to revisit.
Hypothesis 3c: Social environmental factors positively
affect word-of-mouth intentions.
Figure 1 outlines the proposed relationship between atmospheric elements and specific visitor behaviors, as well as the
proposed hypothesized paths.

METHOD
The Sample
For a 2-month period in the summer of 2004, visitors to
four key attractions in Tampa, Florida (Museum of Science
and Industry, Florida Aquarium, Tampa Bay Performing
Arts Center, and Lowry Park Zoo), were personally interviewed as part of a comprehensive destination-marketing
research project focusing on Florida visitors. These sites
were selected as heritage/cultural tourism facilities based on
the wide conceptualization of heritage/cultural tourism put
forward by Boyd (2002). Boyd (2002) made the argument

that cultural tourism explores the cultural and natural heritages of peoples, highlighting natural physical beauty,
urban and industrial developments, as well as historical
landmarks. The Museum of Science and Industry focuses on
the industrial heritage of Florida, and the Tampa Bay
Performing Arts Center promotes Florida’s cultural heritage.
The Florida Aquarium and Lowry Park Zoo both focus on
the natural heritage of Florida.
Throughout a 2-month period, visitors exiting these four
attractions were randomly approached by trained interviewers
to discuss their recent experience at the attraction they had
just visited. All attractions were targeted multiple times at random with interviews taking place at random times throughout
the day at each location. To not create time-of-day responses
bias, visitors were interviewed at each facility in both the
morning and afternoon periods. Five interviewers were placed
at the exit points of each facility, and each interviewer randomly approached a minimum of 50 visitors daily with the
goal of acquiring at least 35-40 respondents.
Every third adult (older than 21 years of age) exiting the
attraction was approached to participate in the study. Once
qualified as nonresidents to the particular county at the site
in which they were contacted, visitors were then asked to
respond to a survey related to their heritage/cultural attraction visit. Specifically, the interviewer asked respondents
about their intention to revisit, their overall impression of
the attraction, on-site expenditures, intention to recommend
the attraction to others (i.e., word-of-mouth intentions),
service quality perceptions, service environment perceptions, and overall image of the attraction.
In addition to questions about the specific attraction
recently visited, respondents were also asked information
about their general travel behavior. Information pertaining

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

350

FEBRUARY 2007

to economic expenditures, party size, length of stay, demographics, activities (e.g., What specific activities have you
visited during this trip?), and many other dimensions were
represented on the survey instrument. Individuals were
informed in advance that the survey took approximately 10
minutes to complete and that there was no incentive given
for those individuals deciding to respond. More than 90% of
all qualified individuals agreed to participate in the interview process. All interviewers were trained in multiple languages to ensure all interviewees fully understood the nature
of the research.
Ultimately, 500 heritage/cultural attraction visitors provided data suitable for analysis. Specifically, the sample was
composed of 49% men and 51% women with an average
income of $27,660. In terms of ethnicity, 93.8% of the sample was Caucasian, 2.6% were African American, 2.4% were
Asian American, and 1.2% identified themselves as Hispanic.

Behavioral Intentions

Measurement Scales

The above-mentioned nine hypotheses were tested using
multiple regression analyses. Word of mouth, intention to
revisit, and attitude to the facility were each regressed on the
three service environment factors (ambiance, layout, and
social factors) in a block regression analysis in which each
DV was regressed on the three environment factors simultaneously. The findings offered support for all of the abovementioned hypotheses, with the exception of hypothesis 3c.
The social environment in the heritage/cultural environment
does not significantly affect a consumer’s word-of-mouth
intentions (p =.441). Variance of inflation factor (VIF) statistics illustrate that multicollinearity is not an issue in any
of the analyses conducted because all of the VIF statistics in
the various regression models are considerably below the literature cutoff of 10 (Hair et al. 2006) and the rule-of-thumb
cutoff of 4. Table 3 outlines the results for the regression
analyses, and figure 1 illustrates the significant paths and
hypotheses.
In the first set of analyses, intention to revisit was
regressed on ambiance, design and layout, and social environmental factors. Based on the adjusted R2 for this dependent variable (DV), we know that 76% of the variance in
intention to revisit can be explained by these three environmental factors. Ambiance factors (color scheme, lighting,
and signage) appears to have the strongest impact with a β =
.632 and a t value of 14.177, over design and layout factors
(general layout, use of space, functionality, and ease of finding your way around) and social factors (superior service
staff, and courteous and knowledgeable tour guides). Social
factors appear to be negatively correlated with intention to
revisit, suggesting that perhaps the social elements in these
attractions have room for improvement.
In the second set of analyses, word-of-mouth intentions
was regressed on ambiance, design and layout, and social
environmental factors. The adjusted R2 for this dependent
variable indicates that 29% of the variance in word-of-mouth
intentions can be explained by these three environmental
factors. Once again, ambiance appears to have the strongest
impact with a β =.692 and a t value of 4.793. In this set of
analyses, however, social factors do not significantly affect
a visitor’s intention to recommend an attraction to others.
In the third and final set of analyses, attitude to the attraction was regressed on ambiance, design and layout, and social

Each of the constructs in the conceptual model was operationalized using established scales either in an adapted
form due to concerns for survey length or in their original
format. All items were measured on 7-point semantic differential or Likert-type scales with anchors of 1 = strongly disagree and 7 = strongly agree, or 1 = poor and 7 = excellent.

Service Environment
Measurement for the dimensions of the service environment was based on Baker’s (1986) conceptualizations of the
service environment. Items were adapted from scale items
used in Baker et al. (2002). Overall, 40 physical environment items were used to examine the impact of atmospherics on specific visitor behavior. These items were grouped
into three general areas: ambient factors, design and layout
factors, and social factors. Through a reliability analysis in
which items were deleted to improve the reliability of the
final scale, each of these three scales ended up with a maximum of 4 items. Specifically, the ambient dimension was
measured using 3 items that assessed the attraction’s performance with respect to color scheme, lighting, and signage.
The design and layout factor was composed of 4 items: ease
of finding what you want, traffic flow of customers, layout
functionality, and open space utility. The social factor was
based on a 4-item scale and evaluated the service employees
of the attraction. It consisted of items relevant to their courteous nature and knowledge levels, as well as the quality of
service they provided. These scales had reliabilities ranging
from .83 to .98. Table 1 outlines the items and reliabilities of
each scale used in the analyses.

Attitude toward the Attraction
The subjects rated their attitude toward the attraction
using three 7-point semantic differential items with the endpoints labeled good/bad, favorable/unfavorable, and positive/negative (Hensel and Bruner 1992; Osgood, Suci, and
Tannenbaum 1957). Scales similar to this one have been recommended and used successfully in the marketing literature
(Oliver 1980). The scale reliability was .88.

Respondents’ behavioral intentions were assessed using
two separate scales: one assessed repeat visit intentions, and
the second assessed word-of-mouth intentions, or the intent
to recommend the facility. Similar scales are reported
throughout the services literature (Zeithaml, Berry, and
Parasuraman 1996). Repeat intentions had a reliability of
.80, whereas word-of-mouth intentions had a reliability of
.98. Each of the constructs under study was operationalized
using existing scales that have been previously validated in
other research. All items were measured on a 7-point,
Likert-type scale. Table 1 outlines the various items used for
each measure. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics, correlations, and reliabilities.

ANALYSES AND RESULTS

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

JOURNAL OF TRAVEL RESEARCH 351
TABLE 1
INDIVIDUAL ITEMS FOR EACH MEASURE
Variable

Scale Item

Ambiance service environment

1. This facility has good lighting.
2. This facility has a good color scheme.
3. This facility has good signage and availability of information.
1. This facility has a good functional layout.
2. This facility has a good use of open space.
3. This facility has a good flow of customer traffic.
4. It is easy to find the way around this location.
1. The tour guides at this facility are very knowledgeable.
2. This facility offers good service.
3. The staff at this facility is courteous.
4. This facility has a good staff.
1. My overall attitude toward this facility was positive.
2. My overall attitude to this facility is favorable.
3. My overall attitude to this facility is good.
1. I would revisit this facility in the future.
2. If given the opportunity, I would return to this facility.
3. I am loyal to this facility.
1. I would recommend this facility to my friends.
2. I would say positive things about this facility.
3. I would encourage friends and relatives to visit this facility.

Design and layout service environment

Social service environment

Attitude to the facility
Intention to revisit the facility
Word-of-mouth intentions

Reliability Score
.88
.83

.96

.88
.80
.98

TABLE 2
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS, CORRELATIONS, AND RELIABILITIES FOR VARIABLES
Variable

Mean

SD

R

Attitude to
the Facility

Word of Mouth

Intention to
Revisit

Ambiance

Layout and
Design

Social

Attitude to the facility
Word of mouth
Intention to revisit
Ambiance
Layout and design
Social

4.71
4.70
4.55
4.48
5.04
5.73

1.29
1.58
1.32
0.844
0.704
0.774

.88
.98
.80
.88
.83
.96

—
0.648
0.938
0.779
0.764
0.035

—
0.617
0.523
0.471
0.010

—
0.852
0.764
0.042

—
0.817
0.092

—
0.118

—

environmental factors. The adjusted R2 for this dependent
variable indicates that 68% of the variance in attitude to the
attraction can be explained by these three environmental factors. In this analysis, layout and design has the strongest
impact on attitude to the attraction with a β =.439 and a t
value of 8.519. Once again, social factors appear to be negatively correlated to attitude to the attraction. These findings
illustrate that the physical environment does indeed affect
how consumers perceive an attraction as well as their intention to revisit and recommend that attraction.

DISCUSSION
Customer orientation is a popular buzzword in the
service industry. Ultimately, each and every effort performed in the service industry is aimed at a higher level of
service and greater level of satisfaction for the consumer.
Researchers have argued that positive perceptions of customer orientation are positively associated with perceived
service quality, the firm’s service environment, as well as the
performance of a firm’s employees (Brady and Cronin
2001). As such, our understanding and examination of the
physical service environment become paramount if we aim
to provide superior customer service and be perceived in

the minds of the consumer as being customer oriented in
our day-to-day functions. Findings from this study highlight the role of the physical environment in contributing to
a more customer-oriented heritage and cultural tourism
sector.
Previous research in travel and tourism has pointed to the
relationship between destination atmospheric cues and consumer perceptions of that destination as a whole (Echtner and
Richie 1991; Gartner 1989, 1993; Mazanec 1994). Most of
these atmospheric cues have, however, been related to hotel
accommodations, scenery, and landscaping (e.g., Mansfeld
1992). This study examines the role of atmospherics in a completely different setting. Specifically, we examine the role of
environmental cues for hedonic services within a heritage/
cultural tourism setting that includes museums, aquariums,
natural heritage sites, and performing arts centers. The findings suggest that in the same way that room size, view, and
hotel facilities can influence lodging facility image, there are
specific environmental cues that affect the consumer takeaway
or perception with which visitors leave after visiting specific
heritage attractions.
This study offers some empirical direction for managers
of heritage/cultural attractions. Echoing propositions from
Sirgy and Su (2000), the results demonstrate that managers
can manipulate environmental cues to influence consumer

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

352

FEBRUARY 2007
TABLE 3
MULTIPLE REGRESSION ANALYSES FOR WORD OF MOUTH,
INTENTIONS TO REVISIT, AND ATTITUDE PERTAINING TO THE FACILITY
Dependent Variable: Intention to Revisit

Independent Variable
Ambiance
Layout and design
Social
Overall F = 374.465
df = 347/3
R = .874
Sum of squares = 448.184
Mean square = 149.395
Adjusted R 2 = .762

β

SE

T

Sig (p)

VIF

.632
.286
–.093

.070
.082
.044

14.177
6.393
–3.552

.000
.000
.000

2.919
2.937
1.016

Dependent Variable: Word of Mouth
Independent Variable
Ambiance
Layout and design
Social
Overall F = 47.976
df = 346/4
R = .542
Sum of squares = 248.302
Mean square = 82.767
Adjusted R 2 = .288

β

SE

T

Sig (p)

VIF

.692
.435
–.070

.144
.171
.091

4.793
2.537
–.771

.000
.012
.441

2.948
2.958
1.011

Dependent Variable: Attitude to Facility
Independent Variable
Ambiance
Layout and design
Social
Overall F = 252.352
df = 347/3
R = .828
Sum of squares = 383.156
Mean square = 127.719
Adjusted R 2 = .683

β

SE

T

Sig (p)

VIF

.437
.439
–.079

.078
.092
.049

8.490
8.519
–2.617

.000
.000
.009

2.919
2.937
1.016

perceptions of a heritage attraction, as well as increase the
possibility of recommending and revisiting a specific attraction. The results suggest that ambiance, design and layout, as
well as social factors all play a critical role in determining visitation numbers, overall image perceptions, as well as wordof-mouth recommendations. More specifically, the findings
demonstrate that for the visitor, ambiance and design elements play a more significant role than does the social environment as these relate to word-of-mouth recommendations.
This is an indication that although employees may have a role
to play in repeat visits and the final impression or takeaway
perception of the facility, overall the physical environment
plays a significant role in determining what the patron shares
with others after leaving the attraction.
To determine which of these physical attributes were most
significant to visitors, we tested several physical attributes.
From floor design to furniture, we explored visitor responses
to traffic and crowding, parking and restrooms, display technology, layout and interactivity, as well as music, aisle space,
and even the labeling found on exhibits. Altogether, 40 different elements were examined. Ultimately, however, only a
few of the various elements explored proved to be relevant

for visitors to heritage attractions. According to the visitors we
interviewed, ease of finding what you want, traffic flow of the
interior design, available open spaces, general layout, signage,
lighting, and color scheme are all essential in determining how
they evaluate an attraction and by extension how likely they
are to return to said attraction. Similarly, the presence of
friendly, knowledgeable, and superior-service-oriented staff
members as well as the availability of proper signage and general information all assist in ensuring the return of current visitors and positive word-of-mouth evaluations to others about
their experience.
The study findings confirm the validity of investing
resources in the creation of high-quality interior design and
layout and appropriate signage. It also points to the continuing
importance of hiring and training knowledgeable and courteous staff members. The results also indicated, however, that
perhaps it is unnecessary to expend extravagant amounts on all
aspects of an interior upgrade. Instead, management should
focus on the more relevant elements. It is very useful from the
management perspective to know which of the internal aspects
of a facility have the potential to affect most highly the intention of visitors to revisit in the future, word-of-mouth referrals,

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

JOURNAL OF TRAVEL RESEARCH 353

and attitudes toward the attraction. For example, rather than
investing in elaborate flooring, managers may want to focus
instead on larger aisle space and managing traffic flow or on
upgrading signage to multiple languages and improving the
current lighting capabilities. With even the slightest improvement resulting in significant expenditure amounts, management is always in dire need of guidance as to which
improvements would yield the greatest results and which renovations or upgrades could be placed on hold.
The findings reinforce the importance of service culture
(specific to these attractions) to the visitor experience. They
confirm the salience of staff in visitor encounters with the
internal environment of the attraction. Perhaps the fact that
the staff is important to return intention and attitudes to the
attraction, but not to word-of-mouth referrals, may suggest
an area for improvement. Work may need to be done to
improve both the frequency of encounter and the nature of
positive interaction with visitors by staff, especially in payfor attraction environments in which referrals are critically
important to bottom-line performance.
Most of the physical renovations and millions spent in
the travel industry are done based primarily on findings
investigated predominantly in the retailing sector. This study
offers a unique look at the relationship among traditional
SOR factors as outlined in both the marketing and environmental psychology literature, while offering support for that
stream of literature within our unique setting. More importantly, it offers empirical evidence tested within a field setting, which adds to the credibility of the findings and the
significance to the heritage tourism arena.
Finally, U.S. international travel figures have been steadily
declining throughout the past decade. More recently, the
impacts of terrorism, war, world economic recession, and
recent difficulties with the visa issuance process have caused a
reduction in the number of tourists visiting both the United
States as well as other international destinations (Bonn, Joseph,
and Dai 2005). As a result, there is an ongoing need for research
that examines ways to make tourism facilities/attractions more
competitive and offer greater differentiation in a highly competitive marketplace. This research offers some direction for
attractions managers to ensure that their attractions are maximizing the revenues spent to entice the consumer and create a
unique and memorable experience for their visitors.

FUTURE RESEARCH
Although the findings offer tangible evidence of the role
of physical upgrades in promoting improved visitor
numbers, there is still a great deal of investigation left to be
addressed. Moreover, these results are but a preliminary step
for researchers who need to further examine the various elements that affect consumers in the tourism attraction setting.
For example, pre- and postrenovation tests need to be conducted on significantly renovated buildings and facilities
with an aim of testing the difference in visitor numbers, perceptions, and overall attitudes toward the attraction. Future
research should address differences between local resident
and nonresident perceptions. In addition, the nature of the
experience based on attraction size, scale, and budget capacities needs further examination.
It would also be interesting to use the measures established in this research to examine the external role of the

heritage attraction as icons and sources of identity in the
urban or natural landscape. Research addressing the internal
environment could be conducted to examine the validity of
the instrument in mega-events or exhibitions, highly interactive attractions, more passive gallery experiences, children’s
museums, science centers, urban landscapes, and so on. A
further area for inclusion in this or a new tool, however, is
the extended role of education, performance theater, and
active interpretation, as well as the ways in which behindthe-scenes curating and collections management affect the
visit experience—in a sense, the value chain that produces
experience in the front-of-house arena. The relevance of this
tool for other tourism attractions such as theme parks, natural landscapes, botanical gardens, small museums, and so
on could also be investigated, as could its relevance in different cultural settings.

CONCLUSION
The business of renovation is a multimillion-dollar
industry. Annually, numerous attractions and tourism facilities invest millions of dollars to undergo facility facelifts.
Museums, aquariums, zoological parks, conservatories, historic districts, and the like all make a concerted effort to
update and renovate. Yet, there is limited published academic research on the return on investment available to these
facilities for their exceptional capital outlay.
This study offers a unique inside investigation into whether
visitors and patrons even acknowledge all of these physical
upgrades within the heritage attraction setting. The findings
suggest that heritage/cultural attractions are unlike the retailing
sector, in which the social factor plays a significant role on
dependent variables such as word-of-mouth intentions. In
these hedonic attractions, the social factor is the least important atmospheric dimension as it pertains to personal word-ofmouth recommendations. Instead, ambient factors such as
lighting, color, and signage, combined with design factors
such as spaciousness and traffic flow, are far more important to
visitors than elements such as facility attractiveness, tour guide
availability, music, and merchandise quality.
Most museums and cultural/heritage tourism attractions
raise revenue from a combination of entrance fees, sponsorships, and society memberships (Prideaux and Kininmont
1999). These results indicate that rather than spending
millions on creating impressive exteriors to improve visitor
numbers, managers should first try less expensive improvements that address minor issues such as signage, lighting,
and even wall color. These improvements could achieve
rapid, low-cost change to mood and pace within the attraction, retain freshness of appearance, and achieve the wider
goals of relevance to changing community needs and
tourism flows. Techniques such as flexible lighting and
darkness, color shifts, performance (music, actors), sound
events, and short-term barriers can quickly transform existing spaces into a different sensory environment of emotion,
movement, action, and tranquil rest spaces. Paradoxically,
however, an initial investment in infrastructure is often
required to insert the hidden machinery needed to develop
sound and lighting systems that will result in long-term cost
savings.
The findings point to some relatively inexpensive ways to
prolong the investment in such activities and yet remain fresh

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

354

FEBRUARY 2007

in the eyes of visitors. They also may suggest that the design
and installation of exhibitions and public way-finding techniques might well continue beyond the typical one-off completion date. Such extensions would lengthen exhibit permanence
and changeover horizons, but at the same time retain freshness
for the visitor. It would also have the effect of spreading budgets and planning, potentially improving cash flow. In addition,
investments in customer service training are usually less revenue intensive than major renovation undertakings, but may
have a similar impact in terms of increasing repeat visits and
improving facility perceptions. Presently, managers may be
spending an unnecessary amount of capital on massive physical upgrades that could be substituted with considerably
cheaper undertakings and yet produce the same end result, a
better overall perception of the attraction.
This study is testimony to the fact that the cultural and
heritage tourism sector is unique as it pertains to how atmospherics affects visitors. The elements that are relevant in this
sector are different from those useful in the retailing industry, and more importantly, visitors to leisure facilities such
as aquariums, museums, and performing arts centers are not
responsive to some of the major renovations and physical
changes that are commonplace in the industry. This suggests
that cultural/heritage managers everywhere are missing an
opportunity to increase their visitor numbers via minor
changes that ultimately can have major returns on their overall visitor perception and on the attraction’s bottom line.

REFERENCES
Art Business News (2004). Museum matters. http://www.artbusinessnews.com (accessed November 5, 2006).
Ayala, H. (1996). “Resort Ecotourism: A Paradigm for the 21st Century.”
Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administrative Quarterly, 37 (October):
46-53.
Baker, J. (1986). “The Role of Environment in Marketing Services: The
Consumer Perspective.” In The Services Marketing Challenge: Integrated
for Competitive Advantage, edited by J. A. Czpeil, C. Congam, and
J. Shanaham. Chicago: American Marketing Association, pp. 79-84.
Baker, J., D. Grewal, and A. Parasuraman (1994). “The Influence of Store
Environment on Quality Inferences and Store Image.” Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 22 (Fall): 328-40.
Baker, J., A. Parasuraman, D. Grewal, and G. Voss (2002). “The Influence
of Multiple Store Environmental Cues on Perceived Merchandise
Value and Patronage Intentions.” Journal of Marketing, 66 (April):
120-41.
Barbieri, K. (2004). “$63M Facelift at Brooklyn Museum Set to Welcome
Larger Crowds.” Amusement Business, 116 (April 17): 5.
Bellizzi, J. A., A. E. Crowley, and R. W. Hasty (1983). “The Effects of
Color in Store Design.” Journal of Retailing, 59 (Spring): 21-45.
Bitner, M. J. (1986). “Consumer Responses to the Physical Environment
in Service Settings.” In Creativity in Services Marketing, edited by
M. Venkatesan, D. M. Schmalensee, and C. Marshall. Chicago:
American Marketing Association, pp. 89-93.
——— (1990). “Evaluating Service Encounters: The Effects of Physical
Surroundings and Employee Responses.” Journal of Marketing, 54
(2): 69-82.
——— (1992). “Servicescapes: The Impact of Physical Surroundings on
Customers and Employees.” Journal of Marketing, 56 (April): 57-71.
Bonn, M. A., S. M. Joseph, and M. Dai (2005). “International versus
Domestic Visitors: An Examination of Destination Image
Perceptions.” Journal of Travel Research, 43: 294-301.
Booms, B. H., and M. J. Bitner (1982). “Marketing Services by Managing
the Environment.” Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration
Quarterly, 23 (May): 35-39.
Boyd, S. (2002). “Cultural and Heritage Tourism in Canada: Opportunities,
Principles and Challenges.” Tourism and Hospitality Research, 3
(February): 211-33.
Brady, M. K., and J. Joseph Cronin Jr. (2001). “Customer Orientation:
Effects on Customer Service Perceptions and Outcome Behaviors.”
Journal of Service Research, 3 (3): 241-51.
Capstick, B. (1985). “Museums and Tourism.” International Journal of
Museum Management and Curatorship, 4: 365-72.

Cash, S. (2004). “New Building for New Museum.” Artworld (January): 136.
Cook, T. (2001). “Archival Science and Postmodernism: New Formulations
for Old Concepts.” Archives & Museum Informatics, 1 (1): 3-24.
Davis, T. R. (1984). “The Influence of the Physical Environment in
Offices.” Academy of Management Review, 9 (2): 271-84.
Dietsch, D. K. (1997). “Museum Boom.” Architecture, 86 (12): 11-12.
Dube, L., Chebat, J-C., and S. Morin (1995). “The Effects of Background
Music on Consumers’ Desire to Affiliate in Buyer-Seller Interactions.”
Psychology and Marketing, 12 (July): 305-19.
Echtner, C., and J. R. B. Richie (1991). “The Meaning and Measurement of
Destination Image.” Journal of Travel Studies, 2: 2-12.
Eroglu, S. A., K. Machleit, and L. M. Davis (2001). “Atmospheric Qualities
of Online Retailing: A Conceptual Model and Implications.” Journal
of Business Research, 54: 177-84.
Eroglu, S. A., and K. Machleit (1990). “An Empirical Study of Retail
Crowding: Antecedents and Consequences.” Journal of Retailing, 66
(2): 201-2.
Gartner, W. C. (1989). “Tourism Image: Attribute Measurement of State
Tourism Products Using Multidimensional Scaling Techniques.”
Journal of Travel Research, 28 (2): 16-20.
——— (1993). “Image Formation Process.” Journal of Travel and Tourism
Marketing, 2: 191-215.
Hair, J. F. Jr., W. C. Black, B. J. Babin, R. E. Anderson, and R. L. Tatham
(2006). Multivariate Data Analysis. 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice Hall.
Harrell, G. D., M. D. Hutt, and J. C. Anderson (1980). “Path Analysis of
Buyer Behavior under Conditions of Crowding.” Journal of
Marketing Research, 17 (February): 45-51.
Hensel, P. J., and G. C. Bruner (1992). “Scaling and Measurement: Multiitem Scaled Measures in Sales Related Research.” Journal of
Personal Selling and Sales Management, 12 (3): 77-83.
Kotler, P. (1973). “Atmospherics as a Marketing Tool.” Journal of
Retailing, 49 (Winter): 48-64.
Mansfeld, Y. (1992). Tourism: Toward A Behavioral Approach. Oxford:
Pergamon.
Mazanec, J. (1994). “Consumer Behavior.” In Travel, Tourism and
Hospitality Research, edited by J. R. B. Ritchie and C. R. Goeldner.
New York: John Wiley, pp. 294-99.
Mehrabian, A., and J. A. Russell (1974). An Approach to Environmental
Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Milliman, R. E. (1982). “Using Background Music to Affect the Behavior
of Supermarket Shoppers.” Journal of Marketing, 46 (2): 86-91.
Mooney-Melvin, P. (1991). “Historic Sites as Tourist Attraction:
Harnessing the Romance of the Past: Preservation, Tourism and
History.” Public Historian, 13 (2): 35-48.
Obermiller, C., and M. J. Bitner (1984). “Store Atmosphere: A Peripheral
Cue for Product Evaluation.” In American Psychological Association
Annual Conference Proceedings, Consumer Psychology Division,
edited by D. C. Stewart. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, pp. 52-53.
Oliver, R. L. (1980). “A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents and
Consequences of Satisfaction Decisions.” Journal of Marketing
Research, 17 (4): 460-69.
Osgood, C. E., G. J. Suci, and P. H. Tannenbaum (1957). The Measurement
of Meaning. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Poria, Y., R. Butler, and D. Airey (2003). “The Core of Heritage Tourism.”
Annals of Tourism Research 30 (1): 238-54.
——— (2004). “The Meanings of Heritage Sites for Tourists: The Case of
Massada.” Tourism Analysis 9 (1/2): 15-22.
Prideaux, B. R., and L-J. Kininmont (1999). “Tourism and Heritage are Not
Strangers: A Study of Opportunities for Rural Heritage Museums
to Maximize Tourism Visitation.” Journal of Travel Research, 37:
299-303.
Shostack, G. L. (1977). “Breaking Free from Product Marketing.” Journal
of Marketing, 41 (April): 73-80.
Sirefman, S. (1999). “Formed and Forming: Contemporary Museum
Architecture.” Daedalus, 128 (Summer): 297-321.
Sirgy, J. M., and C. Su (2000). “Destination Image, Self-congruity and
Travel Behavior: Toward an Integrative Model.” Journal of Travel
Research, 38 (May): 340-52.
Smith, P., and D. J. Burns (1996). “Atmospherics and Retail Environments:
The Case of the Power Aisle.” International Journal of Retail and
Distribution Management, 24 (1): 7-17.
Tian, S., J. L. Crompton, and P. A. Witt (1996). “Integrating Constraints and
Benefits to Identify Responsive Target Markets for Museum
Attractions.” Journal of Travel Research (Fall): 34-45.
Yalch, R., and E. Spagenberg (1993). “Using Store Music for Retail
Zoning: A Field Experiment.” In Advances in Consumer Research,
edited by L. McAlister and M. L. Rothschild. Provo, UT: Association
for Consumer Research, pp. 632-36.
Zeithaml, V. A., L. L. Berry, and A. Parasuraman (1996). “The Behavioral
Consequences of Marketing.” Journal of Marketing, 60 (April):
31-46.
Zeppel, H. (1996). “Indigenous Cultural Tourism: 1997 Fulbright
Symposium.” Tourism Management Report, 19 (1): 103-6.

Downloaded from http://jtr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WAIKATO on February 8, 2007
© 2007 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.

