Accelerat ing t he world's research.

High-end interactive media in the
museum
Maria Roussou
ACM SIGGRAPH 99 Conference abstracts and …

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

Virt ual Herit age: From t he Research Lab t o t he Broad Public
Maria Roussou

Immersive int eract ive virt ual realit y in t he museum
Maria Roussou
Virt ual Herit age at iGrid 2000
T im Port lock

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

25-word summary:
This paper examines the issues involved in the deployment of high-end interactive media and
virtual reality technology in museums while presenting examples of innovative uses worldwide.
Paper:
High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou and Dimitris Efraimoglou
Foundation of the Hellenic World
38 Poulopoulou St.
Athens 11581, Greece
mr@fhw.gr
http://www.fhw.gr/
This paper examines the issues involved in the use of high-end interactive media, computer
graphics applications, and virtual reality technology in museums. As museums adapt advanced
digital media for use in exhibitions and public programs, new relationships take place between the
audience, the venue, the virtual representation and the real object or fact. While the use of stateof-the-art technology can effectively shape how museums deliver public education, issues of high
cost and maintenance of such technology, larger and diverse audience throughput, and difficulty
in content development present important drawbacks. Both the benefits as well as the problems
caused by the deployment of technology in the museum will be analyzed. Examples will be
presented of special museums worldwide that use technology in innovative ways for educational
and artistic purposes. Particular focus will be given to the presentation of the projects created by
the Foundation of the Hellenic World, a cultural heritage institution in Greece, which uses
immersive virtual reality, VRML, and three-dimensional graphics for the reconstruction of
archeological sites, historical interpretation, and education.
Technology in the Museum
Recent technological developments have provided designers with new tools for introducing media
into the museum setting. Many museums are now beginning to utilize more recent information
technology for internal and external organizational purposes while an increasing number of
interactive exhibits are incorporated into galleries in order to enhance the visitor experience.
Museums realize that they are one among many components in a panoply of cultural amenities
and that computer technology can help them quantitatively and qualitatively expand, deepen, and
enhance the museum experience for their visitors. A growing number of museum educators
regard new media as tools that can offer unparalleled opportunities for learning. Through
educational web sites and CD-ROMs, museums have enhanced their role as providers of
informal education. Educators respond to such efforts favorably as these provide alternatives to
restricted curriculum material and allow for more exploration and ownership of the learning
process. Finally, museum visitors, especially non-frequent and novice audiences, appreciate and
benefit greatly from additional forms of information that make the museum a more accessible and
attractive place for them to spend time in.
What are the most common ways that media technology is used nowadays in the museum? One
can broadly define the following ways with which museums incorporate media in their daily
function:
• Audiovisual media used for passive presentation in an appealing way. This for the most part
consists of video presentations on simple monitors or wall projections in special rooms
intended to cover needs in public spaces where staffing is minimal.

High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

•
•
•

Guided presentation with the help of audio guides, video projections, and other means to
accompany visitors throughout their tour and are offered as alternatives to the popular tours
usually given by museum docents.
Interactive browsing stations with information on museum collections and educational
programs (usually kiosks with "press a button" easy-to-learn interfaces).
Environments that provide opportunities for direct creation or production, take-away
experiences, interactive experiences, and innovation.

Current museum theory and practice suggests that technology, as incorporated in today’s
exhibitions, should generally evolve through two successful formats: inquiry-based guided tours
and interactive hands-on exhibits. In this paper we focus on the latter types of technology use,
particularly on interactive media that goes beyond the point-and-click of common multimedia and
information stations. These media may include interactive installations, simulation environments,
interactive film, large format theaters or small-scale exhibits, and virtual reality. The explosive
development of information technology and the increasing confidence on the part of the museums
to incorporate it in their setting has encouraged many institutions to adopt these kinds of
sophisticated technological means, innovative environments, and equipment.
Of particular interest to museums is the use of virtual reality (VR) displays and computergenerated interactive experiences that aim at allowing visitors to travel through space and time
without stepping out of the museum building. The potential to transcend the physical location of
the built environment and the growing sense of the educative function of the museum juxtaposed
with the commercial pressure has lead museums to consider virtual reality as necessary a
component in the arsenal of tools to educate, entertain, and dazzle. Although virtual reality suffers
immensely from media hyperbole and thus has not lived up to its promises, the development of
VR systems has matured enough to find its way out of the research realm and into public
settings. The introduction of projection-based VR systems has shifted the format from the oneman VR experience with bulky headsets and equipment to the slimmed down, more comfortable
visual displays for multiple people simultaneously.

Multimedia and Internet stations in a museum café

High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

Issues and Challenges
The introduction of high-end or virtual technologies in museums runs up against a number of
issues that must be considered. Specifically, high-end technology in the museum must take into
account the physical context of the public space, support the conceptual and aesthetic standards
of the exhibition or learning purpose, and be functional and accessible to its intended audience.
Whether it’s the novelty of interactive technology and virtual reality exhibits or the compelling
nature of the applications themselves, visitors flock to museums to see things that are new and
cutting edge, even if the content remains relatively unchanged. This generates added worries to
museum practitioners who must design keeping their educational role in mind, yet providing the
added novelty, accommodating an increasing range and types of educational experience, and
enhancing their visitor demographic.
Attention can be focused on the following set of issues which previous experience has led us to
recognize as the more critical ones in the process of introducing highly interactive technologies in
public spaces:
1) Bring technology into context.
Technology in a museum exhibit can not stand-alone. To serve museum needs it must address
the specifics of venue and audience, be used in the context of the total museum experience. The
physical context provided by the museum as a public space, the exhibit in its entirety, and the
interaction with the exhibits, the other visitors or the museum staff are all important parts of the
museum whole. The best media is integrated architecturally and conceptually into an overall
exhibition narrative and created directly for the spatial and thematic context of the museum itself.
Effective deployment of technology relies upon the degree to which it can be thoroughly
embedded in its context of use, including the ordinary, practical competencies of those who are to
work with it.
Museum visitors vary in age, level of education, interests, and learning styles. To address these
differences, good exhibit design recognizes the social activity and nature in museums by
providing space for more than one person to get involved and by developing exhibits and media
experiences that often serve as prompts for social interaction. Media productions in the museum
should not come into conflict with the natural, often non-linear, ways a visitor interacts with the
museum space. The multi-modal nature of interactive technologies provides ideal ground for the
development of flexible tools for both a group experience and the opportunity for personal
knowledge.
2) Technology must be seamless.
A well-designed environment is one that is consistent, predictable, and transparent. New media
tools are just elements to enhance the educational, informational or aesthetic goals of any given
exhibit, and should thus be seamlessly incorporated. We do not want the media experience to
seem like an add-on, an extra to the exhibition, but an integral part of it. Hence, the technology
should be designed to “disappear” during the experience, be non-obtrusive. Projection systems
and computer equipment, for instance, can be hidden from view and acoustically isolated, visual
cues associated with the projection surface or other equipment minimized.
3) Provide immediate feedback yet prolonged engagement.
Donald Norman identifies four principles of good design that can be applied to an information
environment to make it self-explanatory and not frustrating: visibility, a good conceptual model,
is inevitably controlled, structured, and brief. Hence, responsiveness and feedback are
particularly important in museum media settings where we encounter only brief interactions, even
in structured events. Users of multimedia installations expect a response immediately otherwise
they walk away. This may be more difficult with highly interactive environments where interactivity
is not easily controlled. Experiential-based installations and participatory environments must
demonstrate different strategies to include and involve the observer in the events on a long-term
High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

basis. Advanced forms of interactive technology, such as virtual reality, allow us to tie together
the time and space-breaking nature of interactive media with the time and space-bound nature of
the site-specific museum environment. The key is to provide immediate responsiveness and then
prompt for deeper involvement from the part of the user.
Overall, experience from the use of virtual reality with large groups of children has shown that the
effect can be much more powerful if it possesses two important attributes: an interacting mentor
and long-term engagement with the learner.
4) Design with content in mind and involve the experts.
In many cases, high-end technological innovation often creates the suspicion of high cost and low
content. Current applications seem unable to step out of paradigms created by other media. “Old
media” do not always translate gracefully into new media environments, producing in many cases
outcome that seems fragmented. It is also often the case in advanced media environments that
novelty overshadows content. Technological developments may often be associated with
disappointing gains for users whereas compelling content will most likely engage the visitor
regardless what the form of presentation may be.
As a result, most educated audiences are skeptical regarding the added value and
appropriateness of advanced technology applications in the public domain. Based on the above,
it is important to use the involvement of content experts when designing interactive and virtual
environments. As difficult as it may be for educators, artists, designers, archeologists, historians,
architects, doctors, scientists, or technicians to speak the same language, it is nevertheless
essential for the creation of sound and complete environments. Collaboration must definitely take
place amongst those who are concerned with how things work and those who are not concerned
with the technical details but with what is delivered to the public.
The designers of new media must understand the medium to achieve the perfect blend of form
and function. Means to draw visitors must be used and they must meet expectations both in
terms of their innovation and their delivered content. Questions should be asked regarding the
underlying principles that are guiding the development of content and conventions should be set
for structuring and delivering this content. The museum must provide the best combination of
technological innovation and educational content and create a shared critical context within which
to understand the work aside from understanding it technically.

Children interacting with high-end immersive virtual reality in the museum.
5) Be concerned about physical and accessibility issues.
High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

Clearly, an important point of particular relevance to high-end technology is usability. Public
viewing must be considered in the context of hundreds of people who will visit a site each day,
more so if the site is set up for visitor interaction. Practical issues and problems are especially
apparent when the apparatus is not designed with novice or special users in mind, as is the case
with most experimental high-end computer technology. In the case of virtual reality, for example,
it is common for most systems to cause motion sickness; active stereoglasses are too large for
small heads, too fragile, and too expensive to trust them with any excited visitor, let alone a child;
children must use both hands to operate hard-to-use interaction devices, hold the stereoglasses
with special ties, or even deploy support systems to stand up higher in order to achieve the
correct viewing angle.
Issues of high cost and maintenance of advanced technology, larger and diverse audience
throughput, and difficulty in content development present important drawbacks for public venues.
Prohibitive costs of such technologies and concomitant inaccessibility, staff development,
operation, and maintenance can find no place in dwindling museum budgets overwhelmingly
dominated by human resource costs.
Good sight lines, ample seating where applicable, comfortable viewing for extended periods,
good field of view, and ergonomics are some of the issues that must be addressed when
designing a unique, high-end environment. The interactive experience must also have an easy to
learn and simple to use interface, which is accessible to a wide range of skill levels and requires
virtually no visitor training.
In brief, accessible new media to the public must be characterized by:
• Attractive designs
• Rugged engineering
• Accessibility
• Practical to maintain
Despite the above issues, there are ambitious and significant efforts taking place in museums
worldwide that have used high-end technology to complement their exhibitions. Some examples
of innovative media use in museums are mentioned below.
Innovative Examples of Media Museums and Museums Using Media
Science museums, hands-on children’s museums, large "edutainment" venues, and recreation
parks have traditionally been the ones to embrace new media first. Museums such as the
Exploratorium, the Tech Museum of Innovation, or the Computer Museum in the United States
employ fascinating and sophisticated interactive installations and have been presenting up-todate results on the creative use of technology.
Aside from existing museums that have employed higher-end technologies, a new form of
museum has emerged, as exemplified by a growing number of media museums worldwide such
as the Ars Electronica Center in Austria, the ICC center in Japan, and the Center for Art and
Media (ZKM) in Germany. These are new types of museums devoted to the depiction and
presentation of new media, or ‘productive media art museums’ as coined in ZKM’s mission
statement. They are true pioneers in the use of high-end interactive technologies open to the
public. The Ars Electronica Center, for example, was the first museum worldwide to install and
open to the public a CAVE™, an immersive multi-person virtual reality room, where highresolution, 3D video and audio is projected on three walls and the floor.
In the more traditional fields of fine arts, archeology, and history, there are hardly no museums
that have moved beyond multimedia presentations (which are even usually placed outside their
main exhibition galleries). Unique is the case of the Foundation of the Hellenic World (FHW), a
non-profit cultural institution in Athens, Greece. The Foundation's mission is to preserve and
High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

disseminate Hellenic culture, historical memory and tradition, as well as project the contribution of
the Hellenic spirit in the development of civilization. Its main plan for operation is the use of
advanced technological methods to promote this understanding of the past, as a point of
reference for the shaping of the present and the future. The Foundation is housed in a large
innovative museum/cultural center on an old 18-acre industrial plot in Athens, where historical
exhibits on all periods of Hellenic culture are presented using the latest audiovisual technology.
Consistent with the Foundation's decision and commitment to use state-of-the-art technology,
normally found only in research labs, is the plan to develop a type of "VR center" focused on the
cultural domain. Not only is this blend of the traditional with the most advanced unique as far as
museums are concerned, it is also a one-of-a-kind endeavor for Greece.
Specifically, the Foundation of the Hellenic World's high-end technology endeavors involve
immersive virtual reality. Generally, VR technology in FHW functions in two basic ways: as an
educational/entertainment tool and as an instrument of historic research, simulation, and
reconstruction. Examples of applications include an educational environment related to traditional
Greek costume throughout time and the reconstruction and journey through the ancient city of
Miletus by the coast of Asia Minor, as it was in antiquity. Guided by a virtual "time-machine", our
travelers are able to explore the city as it unfolds through time, and experience the life of its
architectural glory, its people and their customs, habits, and way of life. To present such projects,
the Foundation has purchased a roving immersive projection table, the ImmersaDesk™. This
virtual reality environment "on wheels" has the ability to move about the museum campus. It thus
enables the creation of a truly flexible virtual reality setting for the museum and allows for
customization of the virtual reality exhibit to any current exhibition or program.
While this type of setup can afford unique educational and recreational opportunities, equipment
of this kind is inevitably in an experimental stage and suffers from a number of drawbacks in
terms of usability -- essentially many of the practical problems mentioned above: the roving
nature of the particular virtual reality system is a relative advantage as the equipment is fragile
and requires special handling; once installed, the virtual reality equipment requires a specially
designed place where metal structures are not present; the display system must be designed to
withstand breakage, short attention spans, greasy fingers, and large numbers of visitors; the
special glasses are expensive and can break easily as their sizes are not made to fit everyone’s
head; equipment must be placed out of reach, yet accessible to the technical staff; finally,
experienced guides who have both the technical skills and the museum education background
are always required.
The above efforts set standards in the direction of technology use in informal public settings, yet
the contours of the new media landscape are just now becoming visible. No one yet knows what
will be successful or how visitors will ultimately use and interact with these emerging
technologies. We must, therefore, continue to see that the insights gained through experienced
use are adequately translated into the public space, and both inquisitively and critically examined.
Acknowledgements
The CAVE and ImmersaDesk are trademarks of the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois.
The Foundation of the Hellenic World is a privately funded, non-profit cultural institution based in
Athens, Greece. The authors wish to thank the staff of the museum who has worked hard for its
innovative interactive programming and vision.
Notes/References
1. Ars Electronica Center, Linz, Austria, http://www.aec.at/
2. Brooks, F. "What's Real About Virtual Reality?", Keynote speech at IEEE VR '99, Houston,
Texas, March 13-17, 1999.

High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

Final submission #1627 for SIGGRAPH 99 Electronic Schoolhouse –Classroom section

3. Dietz, S. “Curating (on) the Web,” Proceedings of Museums and the Web, Toronto, Canada,
April, 1998.
4. Foundation of the Hellenic World, http://www.fhw.gr/
5. ICC Intercommunication Center, ICC Concept Book, NTT Publishing Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
1997 and http://www.ntticc.or.jp/
6. Norman, D. A. The Design of Everyday Things. Doubleday, New York, 1988.
7. Thomas, S. and Mintz, A. The Virtual and the Real: Media in the Museum, American
Association of Museums, 1998.
8. ZKM - Zentrum fur Kunst und Medientechnologie Karlsruhe, http://www.zkm.de/

High-end Interactive Media in the Museum
Maria Roussou

SIGGRAPH 99
Conference Abstracts and Applications

