GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194
DOI 10.1007/s10708-008-9202-4

Historical space as narrative medium: on the configuration
of spatial narratives of time at historical sites
Maoz Azaryahu Æ Kenneth E. Foote

Published online: 24 September 2008
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008

Abstract This paper examines how narratives of
history are organized spatially at historical sites and
memorial spaces, especially in urban settings and in
places invested with a sense of collective memory.
Much recent research has focused on landscape,
memory, and place and how relationships of political
and social power influence the representation of
historical events in public spaces. Although the
meaning of such sites may be hotly contested for
long periods of time, we focus here on narrative
theory and the related, but unexplored, issue of how
such historical stories are configured on the ground at
actual historical sites. We identify a number of
narrative strategies which are frequently used to
configure historical stories in space. Declamatory
strategies using markers presenting a snapshot of an
event are common, but sequential and non-sequential
linear strategies are also used, as are thematic
strategies that cross-cut space and time to present
complex historical stories at various spatial scales.
Examples are drawn from a range of historical sites in
North America, Europe and Israel.

M. Azaryahu (&)
Department of Geography and Environmental Studies,
University of Haifa, Haifa 31905, Israel
e-mail: maoz.azaryahu@gmail.com
K. E. Foote
Department of Geography, University of Colorado
at Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
e-mail: k.foote@colorado.edu

Keywords Narrative medium  Commemoration 
Public memory  Spatial narrative 
Storytelling

Introduction
Historical sites are dedicated to the cultural production of their pasts. Such cultural productions,
whatever their ideological suppositions, take advantage of the common perception of history as being an
intrinsic quality of the local landscape. According to
Western cultural convention, historical sites provide a
tangible link to the past that they evoke. In this sense,
the presentation of history on-site only makes explicit
that which is implicit in the local landscape. Cultural
productions of the past employ the agency of display
to create an interpretive interface that mediates and
thereby transforms that which is shown into a vision
of history.
Much recent research has focused on landscape,
memory, and place and the ways in which relationships of political and social power influence the
representation of historical events in public spaces
and historical shrines (Foote and Azaryahu 2007).
While the politics of representation are important to
understanding the social construction of public history and the ideological dimension of public memory,
we wish to draw attention to a related, but hitherto
unexplored, issue that pertains to the poetics of
presentation: how historical stories and the temporal

123

180

sequences that underlie them are arranged and
configured in space. We do not discount the debates
which occur over the meaning of such sites, but wish
to focus here on the spatio-rhetorical elements of the
resulting stories.
Students of narrative theory have drawn attention
to the narrative structures afforded by different media
such as the novel, film, photograph and even
computer games and music. Based on the notion of
historical space as a narrative medium, our concern is
related to, but differs somewhat from, the pioneering
study of Potteiger and Purinton (1998) on ways in
which storytelling can be incorporated into landscape
design. Our interest also diverges slightly from
studies concerned primarily with how these spaces
and places are imagined, described, and portrayed in
autobiography, literature, travelogues, film and others
forms. Instead, we are interested in the spatial
configuration of history—the way historical stories
are arranged to be told in space to produce what we
term ‘spatial narratives’ of history. Notwithstanding
the stories they tell and the ideological suppositions
on which they are based, such spatial narratives entail
a configuration of locations and time in space. In
some cases they involve little more than a brief
caption on a marker positioned at a historical site
(Fig. 1). But often spatial narratives involve a
complex configuration of geographic elements
including buildings, markers, memorials, and inscriptions positioned with great care to provide a spatial
story-line or to capture the key locational and
chronological relations of an historical event (Fig. 2).
An important issue is if and how historical time
can be transposed onto historical space and the
possibility to endow historical space with a sense of
chronology. As accounts of past events, histories are
often preoccupied with the notion of precise sequentiality and temporal progression. When history is
presented in a book or a film, the linear progression of
reading or watching often corresponds to historical
chronology. However, when history is presented in
the landscape, historical chronology needs to be
reconfigured onto a set of synchronous spatial
features so that the one-dimensional, temporal
sequence of historical narrative is, so to speak,
‘draped’ across the spatial dimensions of an actual
historical site.
In this paper we examine different modes of
investing historical space with narrative structure by

123

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

the owners and caretakers of a wide range of
historical sites. Our interest in this topic derives from
our research into a variety of historical sites in North
America, Europe and Israel (Azaryahu 1993, 1996a,
1996b, 1997, 1999; Foote 1988, 1990, 2003; Foote
et al. 2000). In writing about the social, cultural and
political dimensions of historical sites and memorials,
we became interested in analyzing the strategies used
to spatially configure historical spaces to tell stories.
Our focus is on the strategies employed rather than on
the stories themselves and the political and cultural
circumstances in which they were created, institutionalized, debated and contested. The cases we
discuss are illustrative of narrative strategies. They
represent both urban and non-urban settings: we aim
to show that these strategies extend not only beyond
specific political and ideological contexts, but also
that their employment is not restricted to specific
geographical settings.
Stories can be told anywhere. Events may be told
orally at the place where they occurred regardless of
the existence of commemorative features in the local
scene. Our argument is that the design of spatial
story-lines in historical spaces has substantial impact
on their narrative structure and properties. By focusing on spatial modes of narrative structure, this paper
highlights historical space as a narrative medium and
in particular draws attention to the configuration of
historical time in historical space.

Narrative and the issue of time
The proposition that narrative is ‘‘anything that tells
or presents a story, be it by text, picture, performance,
or a combination of these [and] hence novels, plays,
films, comic strips, etc. are all narratives’’ (Jahn
2005) suggests that narratives are stories as presented
by certain media. An important issue is the telling
order of the story. For narratologists whose main
concern is literary narratives, the purpose of a
narrative is to ‘‘recount events chronologically’’
(Goodman 1981, p. 115). Temporality is essential:
‘‘Only one kind of thing may be narrated: a time
thing’’ (Scholes 1981, p. 205). Prince (quoted in
Coste 1989, p. 13) maintains that narrative ‘‘may be
defined as the representation of real or fictive events
and situations in a time sequence.’’ The linear
progression of time can be punctuated and also

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Fig. 1 Examples of declamatory strategies used to present
historical narratives at single points. From top: Site of former
Foundery chapel in London associated with John Wesley and
the rise of Methodism; Georgia State Capitol grounds in

181

Atlanta; Marker for the Battle of Sz}
oreg in southern Hungary
from the 1848–1849 War of Independence; and sidewalk
plaque on edge of Chinatown in Los Angeles. Photos by K. E.
Foote

123

182

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Fig. 2 Little Bighorn Battlefield in Montana an example of a
sequential narrative depicting the defeat of 7th U.S. Cavalry
troops under George A. Custer during the afternoon of 25 June
1876. Custer divided his troops into three battalions to attack a
large Indian camp from the south (right). The battalions under
Reno and Benteen were pushed back to a defensive position
above the river known as ‘‘Reno’s Entrenchment’’ where many
survived. The battalion under Custer moved north (to the left)

and was defeated in the area around Custer Hill. This narrative
sequence spans a period of 3–4 hours beginning at 2:35 p.m.
when Reno separated from Custer. The spatial figuration of
narrative highlights key moments in the battle with signs,
markers, memorials and trails all connected from the Visitors
Center along Battlefield Road. Map by K. E. Foote using
National Park Service (2007) digital base maps

reversed in the form of a ‘flash-back’ or a ‘flashforward,’ and time can be slowed down, sped up, or
stopped—all devices used especially in literature,
film and television. Such techniques disrupt the linear
flow of time, but nevertheless they are based on a
clear notion of ‘before’ and ‘after.’
Considerable attention has focused on the ability
of different media to present time. Paintings, sculptures and single photographs ostensibly lack
temporality, whereas written texts and films are
intrinsically temporal. Reading and watching take
time and can be used by the authors mimetically to
simulate the temporal sweep of a story. In his seminal
study, Laocoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting
and Poetry (1962), Lessing distinguishes between the
temporal progression that underlies a poem and the

spatial stasis of a painting. Ryan (2005, p. 292)
observed that: ‘‘As for painting and photography,
they are prevented by their purely spatial nature from
explicitly representing what Ricoeur regards as the
proper subject matter of narrative: the temporal
nature of human experience.’’
However, the contrast between the temporality of a
novel or a film and the spatiality of a painting or a
sculpture should be qualified. As Kermode (1967,
p. 178) suggests, ‘‘Forms in space, we should
remember, have more temporality than Lessing
supposed, since we have to read them in sequence
before we know they are there, and the relations
between them.’’ Importantly, this type of temporality
refers to the experience of reading/watching rather
than to a pre-existing sequential configuration of

123

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

forms in space that underlies cycloramas, cartoons,
animated art, and comics. Indeed, the terms ‘graphic
storytelling’ and ‘visual narrative’ are often used in
the critical literature on comics, graphic novels, and
manga (Eisner 1996; Meadows 2003; Miller 2004).
As a configuration of objects in the landscape, spatial
narratives of history share some features with such
narrative forms, since historical chronology can be
enacted by moving from place to place along a route
or trail, or by showing sequential images (such as
before-and-after photographs or maps) at one place.
Spatial media vary considerably in their narrative
potential and properties. Paintings, sculptures and
photographs cannot easily narrate an entire story, but
can highlight key moments in the action that encapsulate, embody, symbolize and otherwise call to mind
an entire plot (Lessing 1962, pp. 23, 78; Ryan 2005).
Such significant moments in a narrative progression
are the ones ‘‘most suggestive and from which the
preceding and the succeeding are most easily comprehensible’’ (Lessing 1962, p. 78) and are therefore
suffused with narrative meaning.
The contrast between what can and cannot easily
be achieved in spatial forms of historical presentation
is apparent in the case of commemorative street
names. The historical referents co-exist simultaneously in the cityscape, but with no linear thread
of chronological order connecting them, temporality
yields to synchronicity. Commemorative street names
refer to both national and local narratives of history
and may be woven into narratives of the city, but as a
presentation of history, their narrativity is limited to
their commemorative capacity to evoke ‘significant
moments’ or ‘significant heroes’ of history (Alderman 2002, 2003; Azaryahu 1996a, 1997; Berg and
Kearns 1996; Stump 1988; Yeoh 1992, 1996).
Moreover, the spatial arrangement of commemorative street names can be based on a thematic principle
of order like grouping together writers, famous
battles or heroes of a particular chapter of national
history. In such a case the presentation of history,
though lacking chronological order, still possesses a
measure of coherence.

Strategies of spatial narrative
A distinctive feature of how spatial narratives of
history are structured is the way they are anchored in

183

and even constrained by events and places. The
events presented may last anywhere from seconds to
centuries and occupy spaces of a few square meters
or span hundreds of kilometers. A single, welldefined event that occurs over hours in a small area
may offer different narrative possibilities than one
extending over years and a large area.
We argue below, however, that these possibilities
fall into three broad categories which revolve, in part,
around the spatial and temporal scale of the events
themselves (Table 1). The first are strategies that
involve narrating an event from a single point or
place with a marker and are most commonly
employed for events that are constrained spatially
and temporally. The second category includes linear
and sequential chronologies linking time and space
along routes and paths. These are frequently used for
events of intermediate temporal and spatial scales.
The final category encompasses events involving
complex spatial and temporal sequences over large
areas or long periods of time. Spatial narratives of
this category are often difficult to create and are
typically simplified so that they are told in terms of a
straight-forward geographical progression, a purely
chronological order, or some sort of thematic relationship that highlights key moments, people, and
places.

Declaiming history from a single point or place
A common strategy for organizing a spatial narrative
is to tell a story from a single point like the recitation
of an epic poem or the delivery of a soliloquy. Such
narratives are declamatory in the sense of the Oxford
English Dictionary as, ‘‘A public speech or address of
rhetorical character … expressing strong feelings and
addressed to the passions of the hearers,’’ and often
involve formal devices of rhetorical elocution. Events
are reduced to brief inscriptions often in formulaic
prose. Historical sites of this sort are frequently
framed by a fence or wall, with gates sometimes used
to separate the narrative space from the surrounding
area.
Declamatory strategies are common because many
events can be localized to single, easily marked
places (Fig. 1). Typical of these are assassination and
death sites such as those of Huey Long in the
Louisiana State House in Baton Rouge; Prime

123

184

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Table 1 Strategies of spatial narrative
(1) Narratives positioned at single points or places
Events are localized and described from single, easily marked places. Examples: roadside markers, assassination and death sites.
(2) Narratives arranged as linear or sequential paths, routes or trails
(a) Time and space linked in an order specific to a particular event
Example: Mormon Trail across Iowa
(b) Sequential narratives are used to associate places which do not otherwise share any obvious chronological sequence
Example: Philadelphia’s Walking in the Steps of Benjamin Franklin
(3) Narratives depicting complex spatial and temporal sequences over large areas or spanning long time periods
(a) Key places described in linear or non-linear narrative
Example: Masada National Park in Israel
(b) Key moments of event described in linear or non-linear narrative
Example: Driving tour of Gettysburg National Military Park
(c) Complex stories are divided and narrated around component themes and sub-themes
Examples: Women’s Rights National Historical Park in upstate New York; Buchenwald concentration camp
(4) Hybrid narrative strategies using combinations of the previous types
Examples: Arlington National Cemetery; Boston Women’s Heritage Trail; Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum

Minister Rabin in Tel Aviv; or Olof Palme in
Stockholm. Declamatory strategies are also used for
events extending over larger areas when these areas
can be viewed easily from a single vantage point.
Sometimes these are convenient vista points. In other
cases the point of declamation holds significance in
the telling of the story. In Scotland, the memorial to
the national hero William Wallace was built on
Abbey Craig, the high ground assumed to have been
his command post during the battle against English
forces at Stirling Bridge in 1297 (Edensor 1997; Gold
and Gold 1995). In the case of the memorial to the
victims of the Ludlow massacre of strikers and their
families during the 1914 coal ‘war’ in southern
Colorado, it is the death pit where the worst loss of
life occurred that is marked (Saitta et al. 2006).
Declamatory strategies positioned at a single
point can also be effective when events extend
across areas too large to be viewed at once or are
inaccessible. Examples of the latter are maritime
disasters in which stories are told from nearby
vantage points such as the sinking of the Empress of
Ireland in the St. Lawrence River in 1914 and
marked at Pointe-au-Père Québec (Site historique
maritime de la Pointe-au-Père 2007). Although it
sometimes seems obvious in retrospect why such
events are marked as they are, the process often
involves a wide range of contested issues (Foote and
Azaryahu 2007).

123

Linear and sequential chronologies linking space
and time
Time and space are sometimes narrated linearly along
trails or paths with clear starting and ending points
and a chronological progression from point-to-point
along the way. Gates are sometimes used to indicate
the start and end of the spatial narrative and fences,
paths and borders help maintain sequence. Some sites
invite visitors to begin anywhere along a route, others
have a single entry point and fixed order. Choices
about the flexibility of routes are integral to the
spatial narrative itself. If, for example, visitors are
free to visit sites nonsequentially or to skip sections
of spatial narrative, then repetition or overlap of
content is needed from site-to-site. Rigid control of
visitors is nearly impossible over larger sites.
The prototype for many sequential spatial narratives is the pilgrimage. In many religious traditions,
pilgrimage is a journey of moral significance in
which the pilgrim visits sites or shrines associated
with prophets or martyrs as a means of reliving the
triumphs or tragedies of the prophet or martyr. In
many cases, the pilgrimage itself is meant to test the
moral strength, physical stamina, or personal courage
of the pilgrim. In Christianity, the prototypical
pilgrimage route is the Via Dolorosa in the old city
of Jerusalem, the path that is said by tradition to be
the one Jesus walked from his trial to crucifixion.

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Each of the fourteen ‘stations of the cross’ along the
path is associated with a particular event recounted in
the Gospels. The Via Dolorosa is a prototype for
arranging a temporal sequence of events in space that
a pilgrim/visitor can re-enact. Even when such
prototypes are used for organizing spatial narratives,
many variations and complications arise depending
on the geographic contingencies and spatial considerations of the sites.
Time and space linked sequentially along a route
or trail
Among the most common instances are those like the
‘stations of the cross’ in Jerusalem in which time and
space are linked sequentially in an order specific to a
particular event. Some of the best examples are the
marking of paths, trails, routes and journeys. The
Mormon Trail is an example extending over a larger
area and period linking many cities and towns.
Established in 1846–1847 by followers of Joseph
Smith traveling under the guidance of Brigham
Young from Illinois to Utah, the trail is of great
importance to the settlement of the western U.S. as
the key corridor across the central Great Plains before
branching into the Oregon and California trails west

Fig. 3 The Mormon Trail across Iowa, an example of a
sequential narrative arranged spatially over a large area. This
narrative has had to be simplified to tell the story of the first
wave of Mormon immigrants, rather than later waves of
settlers. The map highlights the sites of camps, farms,
settlements, and river crossings important in 1846 as the first

185

of the continental divide. The route was used by
thousands of settlers before the transcontinental
railroads assumed importance after 1869. Events
along the trail have been marked in considerable
detail by local and state authorities, private organizations such as the Oregon-California Trails
Association, as well as individuals and families
(Berrett 2001, 2005; Brown 2004).
The federal government has also played a role since
1978 when the U.S. National Trails Systems Act was
amended to include trails of historic interest, and the
Mormon Pioneer Historic Trail was the first marked.
As an example of how the narrative has been
developed, the leg across Iowa highlights twenty eight
sites that relate to the first movement of Mormons in
1846 (Fig. 3). Rather than narrate the story of all
subsequent groups, the enabling legislation specified
that it was the story of the first year that was to be told
along the trail. This decision simplified what might
have been a series of overlapping spatial narratives
into a single story (National Park Service 2005).
Sequential temporal narratives imposed on space
Sometimes chronological stories are used to link
places which are not ordered in strict sequence.

Mormon pioneers left Nauvoo, Illinois (right) for Winter
Quarters, Nebraska (left), not arriving in Utah until 1847. The
sites and narrative are the work of many groups and are
maintained by the LDS Church; state and local government;
and private associations. Map by K. E. Foote using National
Park Service (2007) digital base maps

123

186

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Perhaps the most common examples of this type of
spatial narrative are tours developed around the life
and work of famous individuals. In these cases, the
chronology of the individual’s life provides the basic
structure of the spatial narrative, usually punctuated
spatially with visits to the sites of important life events
including, most commonly, birth, death and burial.

Philadelphia’s Walking in the Steps of Benjamin
Franklin tour was developed for the Franklin tercentenary celebration of 2006 (Fig. 4). The route recounts
Franklin’s life, but uses it to also tell the story of
Philadelphia and the American Revolution. Anchored
by sites associated with Franklin’s life, the spatial
narrative draws attention to his contributions to the

Fig. 4 Walking in the Steps of Benjamin Franklin tour in
central Philadelphia, an example of a narrative organized
around the life of an individual that serves to spatially connect
a range of otherwise largely unrelated places. In this case, the
route is anchored by three key sites directly associated with
Franklin’s life: the site of his home and print shop (now called
Franklin Court which includes a postal museum honoring

Franklin’s service as first postmaster general); the Christ
Church where he and his family worshiped; and the cemetery
where he is buried. Connected to this route are sites that mark
Franklin’s contributions to a range of institutions and events of
local and national significance. Map by K. E. Foote using
National Park Service (2007) digital base maps and Greater
Philadelphia Tourism Marketing Corporation (2005)

123

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

history of Philadelphia and the United States by
including stops at the Federal Reserve Bank, the Second
Bank of the United States, the Constitution Center on
Independence Mall, and the oldest continuously inhabited street in the U.S., Elfreth’s Alley (Greater
Philadelphia Tourism Marketing Corporation 2005).
Another possibility is to connect existing shrines
to represent a larger historical sequence. The Linking
Trail Walk in Jerusalem that leads from Yad
Va’Shem holocaust memorial to Mount Herzl,
Israel’s national cemetery, was opened in April
2004. As Israel’s primary national shrines, Yad
Va’Shem and Mount Herzl tell, respectively, the
story of the Holocaust and national independence
(Yad Va’Shem 2007). The trail that connects the two
adjacent national shrines tells the progression from
Holocaust to independence that underlies Israel’s
national narrative (Rehabilitation Department Unit
for the Commemoration of Fallen Soldiers 2003,
2004). The narrative function of the trail is enhanced
by local topography; Mount Herzl is topographically
dominant and the trail entails its ascent, underscoring
the symbolism of the trail but also emphasizing a
notion of temporal progression.

Complex sequences over large areas or long
periods
Among the most difficult sites to interpret are those
involving actions over large areas or long periods of
time; a large number of simultaneous events over
wide areas; and complex spatial and temporal interactions within the overall event. These are stories that
revolve around large battles and military campaigns
or major social, economic, political and cultural
transformations like the rise and fall of U.S. slavery.
In all of these cases, no one point, path or trail
provides an effective spatial perspective for narrating
the story. Great simplification is often required—time
or space is shortened, concatenated, compressed,
lengthened, embellished, straightened, or smoothed.
Geographical point-to-point narrative
of significant places
By geographical, we mean a story told from a series
of vista or vantage points, with one element of a story
told at each point, but not in strict chronological

187

order. Geographical narrative offers several advantages for telling complex stories. It permits a
simplification of spatial and temporal complexity—
particularly the problem of narrating simultaneous
events—by presenting their highlights. In movies,
novels and non-fiction narrative it is possible to
simulate simultaneity through cutaways, flashbacks
and a variety of literary devices. At historical sites
that same effect can best be accomplished by picking
certain locations—a particularly noteworthy site or
path—and explaining the action that transpired in its
vicinity.
Geographical narratives of this sort are common at
archeological sites where they are often associated
with the ‘discovery tours’ that facilitate spatial
exploration. An example is the geographical narrative
that underlies the spatial exploration of the Masada
National Park in Israel (Fig. 5). The story of Masada
is a dyadic construct that combines its building as a
magnificent desert fortress by Herod the Great in late
first century BCE and the last stand of Jewish rebels
besieged by the Roman army in 73 CE (Azaryahu and
Kellerman 1999; Ben-Yehuda 1995; Zerubavel 1995).
The buildings and artifacts are layered spatially and
archeologically in ways that would make a strict
chronological narrative confusing to visitors. As
presented at the site, history unfolds as a concatenation of archeological remains and locations that
constitute the significant elements of the local topography (Stiebel 2000). The points narrated by tourist
guides have been carefully selected to highlight key
periods, events, and structures for their individual
significance and for the ways they relate to others.
Chronological narrative of significant moments
Just as geographical narrative allows a story to be
simplified by moving from place-to-place, chronological narrative simplifies temporal and spatial
complexity by presenting a chronological sequence
of an event’s highlights and significant moments
along a trail (Hawthorne 1988).
An example from the American Civil War is the
Gettysburg National Military Park in Pennsylvania.
The battle of 1–3 July 1863 involved combined
armies of approximately 163,000 soldiers fighting
over an area of approximately 40–50 km2, of which
just under 2400 ha are now part of the military park.
The size, length and complexity of the battle make it

123

188

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Fig. 5 Masada National
Park in Israel, an example
of how geographical, pointto-point narrative can be
used in a situation where the
complexity of an
archeological site makes a
chronological strategy
difficult to employ. The
high ground of Masada
includes a fortress built
under Herod the Great, the
remains of the last stand of
a group of Jewish rebels
besieged by the Roman
army in 73 CE, and other
archeological remains.
These stories are told from
the vantage point of
positions in the ruins which
allow visitors to see this
interlayering of stories.
Source: Stiebel (2000)

difficult to narrate. However, one of the most popular
routes through the battlefield is the self-guided auto
tour developed by the National Park Service (2002)
offering the option of a 2 or 3-hour excursion
(Fig. 6). The full eighteen-mile route claims to be—
and generally is—chronological; it begins at McPherson Ridge and ends at the High Water Mark
Memorial and National Cemetery. Yet, this chronologically
configured
narrative
involves
concatenations. One difference, for example, between
the 2- and 3-hour tour is that one key event of the first
day (fighting near Barlow Knob) and two from the
second (fighting at Spangler’s Spring and at East
Cemetery Hill) are omitted. One area omitted from
both tours is the cavalry battlefield just east of the

123

main park where Confederate troops tried to outflank
the Union forces on the third day.
Thematic narratives
A thematic approach to the construction of spatial
narratives serves both to highlight and to separate
issues, periods and perspectives while maintaining
that they belong to one and the same story. Weaving
spatial narratives around a theme—the participants,
causes, ideas, consequences, periods or lessons—
amounts to telling these elements of the story
separately in space. This approach does not preclude
using geography or chronology as an organizing
principle for arranging the spatial narrative, but these
are subordinate to the theme (Fig. 7).

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

189

Fig. 6 Two and three-hour
auto tour routes of the
Gettysburg, Pennsylvania,
battlefield, an example of
chronological narrative of
significant moments
developed to tell the story
of a complex engagement
extending over a large area
during 1–3 July, 1863. In a
battle of this size and
complexity, events which
occurred simultaneously are
narrated sequentially,
particularly the events of
the second day (sites 4, 6–
14), and some events are
left out (the cavalry battles
to the east and south on 3
July) or are included only in
the 3-hour tour. Map by K.
E. Foote using National
Park Service (2007) digital
base maps

Thematic strategies are useful in the construction
of spatial narratives that associate places and their
stories that would, in the absence of a unifying theme,
represent a miscellany of seemingly unrelated sites.
The Women’s Rights National Historical Park in
upstate New York is an illustrative example. In
Seneca Falls and Waterloo, the story of the suffragette movement is told at the houses and meeting
places used by those who authored the 1848 Declaration of Sentiments, a document now viewed as the

start of the U.S. women’s rights movement (National
Park Service 2004; Women’s Rights National Historical Park 1997).
When employed, a thematic ordering of routes
suggests a sense of coherence. This sense of coherence is augmented when thematic and chronological
principles are combined as is the case at the
Buchenwald memorial site in Germany. As decided
in the early 1990s, the official tour of Buchenwald is
divided into three successive periods: the National-

123

190

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Fig. 7 Walking tours of the
Buchenwald concentration
camp near Weimar,
Germany. Visitors may take
any of four paths through
the complex, each
developed around a
thematic narrative. The
reorganization of
Buchenwald’s spatial
narrative was a main feature
of the re-design of the site
in the mid-1990s and
involved two thematic
distinctions. One involved
differentiating between the
two successive periods in
the site history: the Nazi
concentration camp (1937–
1945) and the Soviet
detention camp also known
as Special Camp 2 (1945–
1950). The other aimed at
differentiating between the
victims and the perpetrators
while emphasizing the
perspective of the prisoners.
Map by K. E. Foote

Socialist concentration camp (1937–1945); the Soviet
detention camp (1945–1950); the East German
memorial site (1950–1989). Visitors at Buchenwald
are offered four trails and one monument to visit
(Stein and Stein 1993). Their titles signify their
particular themes and, by implication, their chronology. The National-Socialist camp is presented
through three trails: ‘‘The Way to the Prisoners’
Camp,’’ ‘‘Remains of the Camp Barracks,’’ and ‘‘In
the Footsteps of the Perpetrators.’’ ‘‘Graveyard of
Special Camp No. 2’’ presents the Soviet detention

123

camp and ‘‘The Monument’’ presents Buchenwald
when it served as an East German memorial site.

Hybrid narrative strategies
Narrative strategies are sometimes used in hybrid
combinations, as at Arlington National Cemetery just
across the Potomac River from Washington, D.C.
The cemetery’s history and meaning are complex—
an estate confiscated at the start of the American Civil

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

War from confederate general Robert E. Lee and then
used as a Union burial ground, but now the major
shrine of national heroes. At Arlington, some markers
are declamatory—they announce the sinking of the
U.S.S. Maine in Havana harbor in 1898 to start the
Spanish-American war or the bombing of Pan Am
flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988—but
others are connected by trails that focus on the
cemetery’s history and themes (Arlington National
Cemetery 2007; Bigler 2005).
The Boston Women’s Heritage Trail is a hybrid
strategy of a different sort involving a thematic
strategy subdivided geographically (Kaufman 2006).
The thematic focus honors women who have contributed to Boston, U.S. and world history. But
because this involves so many buildings and places
spread across most of central Boston, the overall trail
has been subdivided geographically into five shorter
walks encompassing the sites found in the North End,
Back Bay, Downtown, South Cove/Chinatown, and
Beacon Hill.
The Oklahoma City bombing memorial is another
example of a hybrid design (Clark 2005; Oklahoma
City National Memorial and Museum 2007). It
honors the victims, survivors and rescue workers of
the 19 April 1995 bombing of the Murrah Federal
Building by a terrorist avenging the killings exactly
two years earlier at the Branch Davidian compound
outside Waco, Texas. The large memorial sites
include the area of the Murrah building, a one-block
length of N.W. Fifth Street (since closed) where the
truck of explosives was parked, and the entire block
of properties north of Fifth Street which were
damaged or destroyed by the blast. In an instant,
the explosion radiated outward to claim and damage
hundreds of lives. The memorial design uses massive
gates which enclose N.W. Fifth Street and frame the
brief instant of the explosion: 9:02 a.m. (Fig. 8). The
footprint of the Murrah building is used to honor the
168 adults and children killed in the blast, one
remaining wall credits those who survived, while the
Rescuers Orchard, Survivor Tree, and Children’s
Area provide space for contemplation.

Discussion and conclusion
These strategies for constructing spatial narratives
contrast with almost all other forms of narrative,

191

particularly those forms which have been studied
extensively, including literature, film, television, the
news media, and drama. Even spatial media which
share some similarities, such as the visual arts and
museum design, differ from spatial narrative. To
configure the narrative involves critical choices of
how to arrange the narrative in terms of locations,
distances, directions, and movements on the ground
at the actual site of the events being recounted. No
other narrative media strives to attach stories to place
in this way. Some forms of historical re-enactment
and performance art do, perhaps, strive toward a high
level of locational or geographical verisimilitude, but
these are relatively rare, as well as ephemeral.
The need to divide, segment, and pace spatial
narratives is common to other forms of storytelling
such as a screenplay or libretto, but the act of
positioning these scenes locationally presents different challenges to the storyteller. As was discussed
above, the characteristics of the event itself—both
spatially and temporally—place constraints on the
narrative structure that exist in no other media.
One of the most important constraints is the
difficulty of sustaining a temporal sequence in space.
In almost all other media, the assumption of the
storyteller is that the reader, viewer or listener will
follow the narrative through to completion. But
spatial narratives are not so easily framed. Apart
from the declamatory strategy, there can be no
assumption that the sightseer/reader will start at a
given place, follow a path in a predetermined order,
or travel a route from its beginning to end. This
means that spatial narratives are configured to use
spatial, visual and geographical cues to direct visitors
along particular routes. Gates are frequently used to
start and end narratives; paths with well-defined
borders, curbs and rails are used to keep visitors on
track; and significant places and moments are
announced with signs and interpretive displays.
Another difference is that spatial narratives are
more frequently co-authored than other types of
narrative. This does not imply that they are less or
more effective than single-authored narratives, but
only that the dynamic of their composition—involving writers, artists, architects, historians, politicians
and others—is different and largely unstudied. Committee authorship of spatial narratives is common,
whereas it is rare in most other narrative media. And,
again, there are advantages to committee authorship

123

192

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Fig. 8 Oklahoma City National Memorial to the bombing of
19 April 1995, an example of a hybrid narrative strategy. In
this case, the memorial frames the moment of the explosion at
9:02 a.m. The areas of the memorial honor the victims,
survivors and rescuers whose lives were changed or claimed in
that instant in time. Small signs identify the meaning of the

different areas of the memorial. Paths through the memorial
and along the reflecting pool allow the visitors to explore the
areas in any order from many different perspectives. Photographs by K. E. Foote using base map courtesy of the
Oklahoma City National Memorial

which pools knowledge, perspectives and talents as
well as disadvantages that can lead to compromise
and stalemate in the development of narrative. Spatial
narratives are also co-authored in that different
individuals, private and public groups, and government agencies at all levels from local to national are
often allowed to share narratives of a single event.
Sections of the Mormon Trail, for example, are
marked by branches of the Mormon church, by local,
state, and federal agencies, by individual families
who lost members along the trail, and by various
hobbyist and historical associations and societies.
This means that historical sites sometimes represent

an overlap or intersection of narratives that together
present almost a collage of stories about a particular
event and place.
A final difference between spatial and most other
narrative forms is that spatial narratives are often
composed and configured over long periods. This
means that authorship can extend over decades,
generations and centuries as the narrative is restructured. This is a different process than the translation
or editing of stories from one language into another,
but it means that the configuration of spatial narratives, more than others, can readily be changed as a
result of social or political pressures.

123

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194

Of special interest to this inquiry has been the
configuration of spatial narratives of time at historical sites as strategies for projecting historical
sequences onto space. As we have argued, some
historical events, especially those that conflate linear
progression in both space and time, can easily be
configured as a spatial narrative of history that
dramatizes successive events. However, complex
events, such as those that extend over long periods
of time or involve multiple, simultaneous movements, are more difficult to configure as a sequential
spatial narrative that accords with historical chronology. Subsequently, in such cases, temporal
sequences are likely to yield to thematic variations
and episodic fragmentation.
We have concentrated here on the configuration of
spatial narratives at historical sites, but many other
issues remain to be explored. One issue is the
susceptibility of different narrative strategies to
ideological modulation. It seems that the declamatory
strategy, where a brief caption on a marker positioned
at a historical site is potentially a key to telling the
local story, is especially susceptible to ideological
modulation. For instance, references to either ‘battle’
or ‘massacre’ offer two diametrically opposite versions of a historical event.
Another important issue is how the structures of
spatial narratives are experienced by visitors and
how they affect the visitor’s interest in or understanding of events. Narrative theory points to the
important role played by the reader, viewer, or
listener in coding and decoding narrative forms. Yet,
apart from limited surveys of museum goers, little
research has been undertaken on the experience of
visitors to historical sites and more is needed. A
wealth of research indicates how the social construction of knowledge is shaped and reshaped by
experience and perception—especially media and
the narrative forms of literature, newspapers, visual
art, travelogues, magazines, television, and film. We
feel that much can be gained by focusing on how
spatial narratives of time intersect with these other
narrative forms to shape conceptions of space, place,
and history.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank all those who
offered useful feedback on this article, including three
anonymous reviewers.

193

References
Alderman, D. (2002). Street names as memorial arenas: The
reputational politics of commemorating Martin Luther
King, Jr. in a Georgia county. Historical Geography, 30,
99–120.
Alderman, D. (2003). Street names and the scaling of memory:
The politics of commemorating Martin Luther King, Jr.
within the African-American community. Area, 35,
163–173.
Arlington National Cemetery. (2007). Retrieved November 7,
2007 from http://www.arlingtoncemetery.org/index.htm.
Azaryahu, M. (1993). From remains to relics: Authentic
monuments in the Israeli landscape. History and Memory,
5, 82–103.
Azaryahu, M. (1996a). The power of commemorative street
names. Environment and Planning D, 14, 311–330.
Azaryahu, M. (1996b). The spontaneous formation of memorial space: The case of Kikar Rabin, Tel Aviv. Area, 28,
501–513.
Azaryahu, M. (1997). German reunification and the politics of
street names: The case of East Berlin. Political Geography, 16, 479–493.
Azaryahu, M. (1999). McDonald’s or Golani Junction? A case
of a contested place in Israel. Professional Geographer,
51, 481–492.
Azaryahu, M., & Kellerman, A. (1999). Symbolic places of
national history and revival: A study of Zionist mythical
geography. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 24, 109–123.
Ben-Yehuda, N. (1995). The Masada myth: Collective memory
and myth making in Israel. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Berg, L., & Kearns, R. (1996). Naming as norming: ‘Race’,
gender, and the identity politics of naming places in Aotearoa/New Zealand. Environment and Planning D, 14,
99–122.
Berrett, L. (Ed.). (2001). Sacred place: A comprehensive guide
to early Latter Day Saint historical sites. Vol. 3, Ohio and
Illinois. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.
Berrett, L. (Ed.). (2005). Sacred place: A comprehensive guide
to early Latter Day Saint historical sites. Vol. 5, Iowa and
Nebraska. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co.
Bigler, P. (2005). In honored glory: Arlington national cemetery
the final post (4th ed.). St. Petersburg: Vandamere Press.
Brown, R. (2004). Historic inscriptions on western emigrant
trails. California: Independence: Oregon-California Trails
Association.
Clark, A. (2005). A memorial walking tour. Oklahoma City:
Oklahoma City National Memorial Foundation.
Coste, D. (1989). Narrative as communication. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Edensor, T. (1997). National identity and the politics of
memory: Remembering Bruce and Wallace in symbolic
space. Environment and Planning D, 15, 175–194.
Eisner, W. (1996). Graphic storytelling and visual narrative.
Tamarac: Poorhouse Press.
Foote, K. (1988). Object as memory: The material foundations
of human semiosis. Semiotica, 69, 243–268.

123

194
Foote, K. (1990). To remember and forget: Archives, memory,
and culture. American Archivist, 53, 378–392.
Foote, K. (2003). Shadowed ground: America’s landscapes of
violence and tragedy (Rev. ed.). Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Foote, K., & Azaryahu, M. (2007). Toward a geography of
memory: Geographical dimensions of public memory and
commemoration. Journal of Political and Military Sociology, 35, 125–144.
Foote, K., Tóth, A., & Árvay, A. (2000). Hungary after 1989:
Inscribing a new past on place. Geographical Review, 90,
301–334.
Goodman, N. (1981). Twisted tales; or story, study and symphony. In W. J. T. Mitchell (Ed.), On narrative (pp. 99–
116). Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Gold, J., & Gold, M. (1995). Imagining Scotland: Tradition,
representation and promotion in Scottish tourism since
1750. Aldershot: Scolar Press.
Greater Philadelphia Tourism Marketing Corporation, Official
Visitor Site for Greater Philadelphia. (2005). Walking in
Benjamin Franklin’s footsteps. Retrieved 7 November
2007 from: http://www.gophila.com/C/Things_to_Do/211/
Itineraries_and_Tours/428/Itineraries/429/I/Walking_in_
Benjamin_Franklins_Footsteps/8.html.
Hawthorne, F. (1988). Gettysburg: Stories of men and monuments as told by battlefield guides. Gettysburg:
Association of Licensed Battlefield Guides.
Jahn, M. (2005). Narratology: A guide to the theory of narrative. Cologne: English Department, University of
Cologne.
Kaufman, P. (2006). Boston women’s heritage trail: A selfguided walk through four centuries of Boston women’s
history (3rd ed.). Jamaica Plain: Boston Women’s Heritage Trail.
Kermode, F. (1967). The sense of an ending: Studies in the
theory of fiction. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lessing, G. (1962 [1766]). Laocoön. An essay on the limits of
painting and poetry (Trans.: E. A. McCormick). Indianapolis: The Boss-Merrill Company.
Meadows, M. (2003). Pause and effect: The art of interactive
narrative. Indianapolis: New Riders.
Miller, C. (2004). Digital storytelling: A creator’s guide to
interactive entertainment. Oxford: Elsevier.
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. (2002).
Gettysburg national military park Pennsylvania. Harpers
Ferry: National Park Service.
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. (2004).
Women’s rights national historical park New York.
Harpers Ferry: National Park Service.
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior. (2005).
The Mormon pioneer trail across Iowa in 1846: Auto tour

123

GeoJournal (2008) 73:179–194
route interpretive guide. Salt Lake City: National Park
Service, National Trails System Office.
Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum. (2007). Visitor guide. Oklahoma City: Oklahoma City National
Memorial and Museum.
Potteiger, M., & Purinton, J. (1998). Landscape narratives:
Design practices for telling stories. New York: Wiley.
Rehabilitation Department Unit for the Commemoration of
Fallen Soldiers, Ministry of Defense. (2003). Mount Herzl
military cemetery visitors’ trail. Tel Aviv: Rehabilitation
Department Unit for the Commemoration of Fallen Soldiers, Ministry of Defense, State of Israel.
Rehabilitation Department Unit for the Commemoration of
Fallen Soldiers, Ministry of Defense and Yad Va’Shem.
(2004). The interconnecting trail walk. Tel Aviv: Rehabilitation Department Unit for the Commemoration of
Fallen Soldiers, Ministry of Defense, State of Israel.
Ryan, M. (2005). Media and narrative. In D. Herman, M. Jahn,
& M. Ryan (Eds.), Routledge encyclopedia of narrative
theory (pp. 288–292). London: Routledge.
Saitta, D., Walker, M., & Reckner, P. (2006). Battlefields of
class conflict: Ludlow then and now. Journal of Conflict
Archaeology, 1, 197–213.
Scholes, R. (1981). Language, narrative and anti-narrative. In
W. J. T. Mitchell (Ed.), On narrative (pp. 200–208).
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Site historique maritime de la Pointe-au-Père, Musée de la mer.
(2007). Retrieved November 4, 2007, from http://www.
shmp.qc.ca/.
Stein, S., & Stein, H. (1993). Buchenwald: A tour of the
memorial site. Weimar: Buchenwald Memorial.
Stiebel, G. (2000). Masada national park. Jerusalem: Israel
Nature and Parks Authority.
Stump, R. (1988). Toponymic commemoration of national
figures: The cases of Kennedy and King. Names, 36,
203–216.
Women’s Rights National Historical Park, Seneca Falls, New
York. (1997). All men and women are created equal. Ft.
Washington: Eastern National Press.
Yad Va’Shem, The Holocaust Martyrs’ and Heroes’ Remembrance Authority. (2007). Visitors guide. Jerusalem: Yad
Va’Shem, The Holocaust Martyrs’ and Heroes’ Remembrance Authority.
Yeoh, B. (1992). Street names in colonial Singapore.
Geographical Review, 82, 313–322.
Yeoh, B. (1996). Street-naming and nation-building: Toponymic inscriptions of nationhood in Singapore. Area, 28,
298–307.
Zerubavel, Y. (1995). Recovered roots: Collective memory and
the making of Israeli national tradition. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

