37

Virtual Archaeology Review

In-Situ Visualization for Cultural Heritage Sites using Novel
Augmented Reality Technologies
Didier Stricker1, Alain Pagani1, Michael Zoellner2
DFKI – TU Kaiserslautern – Augmented Vision Lab, Germany
Fraunhofer IGD, Department Virtual and Augmented Reality, Germany
1

2

Abstract
Mobile Augmented Reality is an ideal technology for presenting information in an attractive, comprehensive and personalized way to visitors of cultural heritage
sites. One of the pioneer projects in this area was certainly the European project ArcheoGuide (IST-1999-11306) which developed and evaluated Augmented
Reality (AR) at a very early stage. Many progresses have been done since then, and novel devices and algorithms offer novel possibilities and functionalities. In this
paper we present current research work and discuss different approaches of Mobile AR for cultural heritage. Since this area is very large we focus on the visual
aspects of such technologies, namely tracking and computer vision, as well as visualization.

Key words:

MOBILE AUGMENTED REALITY, TRACKING, IN-SITU VISUALIZATION

1. Introduction
Mobile Augmented Reality for cultural applications represents a
very challenging area. Highly complex and highly advanced
systems and technologies need to work in a balanced way in
order to produce the apparently simple and intuitive overlay of
virtual information onto images of the reality. In such
applications many technological areas - mobile computing,
energy management, localization and tracking, human-computer
interaction, and visualization – converge together. In that sense,
a mobile augmented reality system can be compared to complex
mobile robotic systems.
The paper delivers insight into the current state of the art
technology, which has been developed and evaluated in practical
European projects, namely ArcheoGuide (IST-1999-11306),
Matris (IST- 002013), and iTACITUS (IST 2.5.10 – 034520).
The paper presents two major contributions in localization and
visualization areas, respectively novel optical tracking algorithms
and the concept of reality filtering for adapted visualization
(Zoellner, 2008).
The paper is structured as follows: in section 2 we present the
components and architecture of mobile AR-systems. Section 3
describes novel tracking solutions which are robust and cope
with jitter. Section 4 is about visualization of available or
reconstructed data and artifacts of cultural sites. We finally
present real applications (section 5) and conclude in section 6.

2. Deploying mobile AR
Site preparation
Before deploying a mobile augmented reality system, a
preparation step is mandatory. It consists in a site survey to

collect the necessary data and plan the hardware installation. In
ArcheoGuide, we collect aerial photographs and surveying data
and enter them in a geographical information system (GIS),
which is also used to construct a digital elevation map. This 3D
site representation enables us also to identify major monuments
and corresponding viewpoints with unobstructed views. The
digital information and virtual 3D models is then attached to
geographical points and thus defines suitable tours for the visit.
Moreover high-definition photographs of the ruins are captured
from the predefined viewpoints along the tour paths. For each
viewpoint, we took a set of tiled photographs to simulate user
movement around it. These pictures are also calibrated and
localized in 3D and build the reference for online localization of
the user on the site.

System overview
A generic and complete architecture and infrastructure for
augmented reality for archeological sites has been proposed
within ArcheoGuide. It can be divided into three basic subsystems: the Site Information Server (SIS), the Mobile Units
(MU), and the Network Infrastructure (refer to Figure 1).
The server is built on a high-end PC with sufficient storage
space to implement a GIS and multimedia database. It is used as
the central repository of the system for archiving the multimedia
information used in the construction of augmented reality tours.
The SIS communicates this information to the clients via a
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN). The clients (MUs) are
portable devices carried by touring users in the archaeological
site.

The Mobile Unit (MU)
The MU system consists of a mobile computer unit, and a
binocular display with a camera attached in front of it. Internally,
a Global Positioning System (GPS) and orientation sensor keep

VAR. Volumen 1 Número 2. ISSN: 1989-9947
Mayo 2010

38

Virtual Archaeology Review
track of the visitor’s current location on the site to provide
background information as well as the respective overlays.
Additionally, an optical tracking system determines the exact
position and view direction of the visitor in order to exactly
place the virtual augmentations into the visitor’s view (See Figure
2 (a)).

2D tracking with reference images
In many cases, visitors look at the ruins at a given point of view.
Thus, the virtual objects are only perceived from the same side,
i.e. in 2D. The tracking can then be reduced to find in the
current image video the right position and orientation of the
virtual graphic objects in 2D.
For this reason, we propose the use of a set of calibrated images
captured from the user’s viewpoint as basic references for the
optical tracking. The user’s view, i.e. the current live video image,
is compared to all reference images and a correlation score is
computed. The best score is retained and the 2D transformation
between the current video-image and the reference image is
evaluated. This is passed to the rendering system for creating the
augmented world.
The reliability of the algorithm represents the most important
aspect of our choice of the registration technique. A lot of
changes may appear between the live and reference images as
new objects or visitors may be present in the scene and new
lighting conditions, due for example to changing sun direction or
clouds, may create new shadows or highlights in the images. We
therefore prefer for these kind of applications to orient our
choice to algorithms that exploit rather global than local
properties of the image. Basically, this corresponds to algorithms
working directly on the pixel intensity of the whole image or in
the frequency space. We opted for a Fourier-based approach due
to its robustness and fast calculation (Stricker 2001). This
approach allows the recovery of only rotation, scaling, and
translation, effectively limiting its application to pre-defined
viewpoints and restricted camera motion.

Figure 1. ArcheoGuide system architecture

3D Tracking

(a)

The 3D tracking approach is similar to the one presented above.
However, the full 3D position and orientation of the user view is
recovered. Here we rely on identification and tracking of local
image features and compute back the rotation out of the motion
of the points in the sub-sequent video images. As presented in
(Zoellner 2008), we learn a representation of each image by
using the Randomized Trees framework introduced by Lepetit et
al. (Lepetit 2005). Following preprocessing steps are done for
each reference image: first, a set of P robust salient points are
selected from the image. This is done by rendering thousands of
randomly warped versions of the image (by warping, we mean a
realistic projective transformation of the image plane), and
running a corner detector on every version. The found corners
are back-projected in the original view, resulting in clusters of
found corners growing with the number of tries. After a given
number of tries (typically several thousand), the P clusters
accumulating the most votes are kept as robust corners. For each
of these robust corners, the 3D coordinates of the point is
computed by making use of the camera pose [Rn; tn] and of the
known 3D model of the object of interest. At runtime, the
Randomized Trees select then the points of the live video image.

(b)

Figure 2. (a) Mobile unit (MU) with augmented reality binocular (b)
Augmented reality view

3. Tracking
The localization of the user on the site represents a key issue of
augmented reality. GPS and compass provides only coarse
positioning information, which are sufficient for delivering
context-related media to the user. However, such sensors are to
slow and not accurate enough to allow proper superposition of
virtual views onto images of the surrounding in real-time as
presented e.g. in figure 2 (b).
Optical systems provide the required data and many approaches
have been developed , the main issue being reliability and
accuracy (no jitter) and this in spite of the difficult conditions of
outdoor environments.

VAR. Volumen 1 Número 2. ISSN: 1989-9947
Mayo 2010

Once the tracking system has been initialized, we start to follow
the position of the object by using feature tracking techniques.
Feature tracking describes the process of following 2D points in
subsequent images that correspond to the same physical point in
the environment explored.
By 2D points, we mean salient points that can be found by
classical corner detectors. These points are described by small
image patches around them, and the set point and patch is called
a feature. In order to follow 2D points, correspondences

39

Virtual Archaeology Review
between points from two consecutive frames of the image
stream must be built and maintained as long as possible. The
longer features are being successfully tracked the more stable is
the camera pose estimation.
After the KLT features have been successfully tracked in 2D, we
end up again with 2D-3D correspondences. It is then possible to
compute the camera position with usual minimization
techniques as in the initialization step.

4. Visualization
The visualization of additional virtual content onto existing
objects and scenes represents a sensitive element of the design
of the augmented reality application. We present in the following
two paragraphs two different approaches which show the
actually large spectrum of possibilities offers by state of the art
mobile graphics.

Seamless Integration: Realistic AR-Visualization
When 3D virtual reconstructions of buildings already exist, as
for example for the site of Olympia, it is of great interest for the
visitor to contemplate them directly on the site, and thus get a
realistic impression of their size, color and global appearance in
the environment.
This impression is unique and one realizes only then for example
how tall and colorful were the Hera, Philipeon (see figure 1(b)
and 3) or Zeus temples at Olympia.

(a)

The following approach is a solution to adapt the real view of a
scene to blend well with black and white drawings in Augmented
Reality applications by applying an inverted Sobel filter on the
video stream. In contrast to the methods described in (Fischer
2005) we are concentrating on 2D textures instead of 3D
models. This avoids the expensive and longsome process of
producing high quality 3D models and the realistic integration
into the video stream. The result is a reduced aesthetic defined
by the original material and an affordable application.
Furthermore it needs less computing power and thus saves
battery life of the mobile device. This applies not only to cultural
heritage sites with only historic material available for
visualization but also for example for architectural visualizations
of 2D plans. In cultural heritage this visual effect results in a
visual time machine via Augmented Reality because the whole
scene is rendered like a real time drawing. A drawing that is
controlled by the user’s movement and is displaying real
buildings and people like a sketch (Figure 8).
Due to the reduced black and white style of the environment
accentuations are much stronger than on a real colorful
background. That enables a more efficient visualization of points
of interest and drives a viewer’s attention on them.

5. Applications
ArcheoGuide: Olympia, Greece
The user positions him/herself at a viewpoint and stares at the
place of interest. In essence, the system treats him as an active
pointing device, and the MU identifies his/her desire to view the
augmentation of this specific monument. It transmits a request
to the SIS, which mines the corresponding audio-visual data
from its database and transmits it back to the MU. The
reconstruction model or animation (see figure 4) is matched to
the live video stream from the web camera, transformed
accordingly, and rendered.

(b)

Figure 3: Real and augmented view of the Hera Temple (Olympia, Greece)

In order to get the highest quality, we pre-rendered the virtual
objects using commercial tools and off-line processing. We
create a set of high-quality 2D views (textures) which were then
inserted at the right place in the image, using the data of the
optical tracking.

Adapting the context: Reality Filters
In many cases, the appearance of the buildings is only
documented with drawings (see figure 5) and any realistic
representation is a pure interpretation. In this case we developed
another techniques for presenting this information as they are in
it real context, again in a seamless way, but this time, we adapt
the context (i,e. the background image) to the virtual
information.

Figure 4: Visualization of virtual athletes on the stadium of Olympia

At the same time, the audio narration is synchronized to the
visual presentation and are both presented to the user via the
binocular and a pair of earphones. The image seen by the user is
illustrated in figure 3(b). He/she can interrupt or alter the flow
of information by moving away from the viewpoint or turning to
another direction.

VAR. Volumen 1 Número 2. ISSN: 1989-9947
Mayo 2010

40

Virtual Archaeology Review

iTACITUS: Reggia Venaria Reale
Within iTACITUS, one of the field test areas of the Augmented
Reality applications is Reggia Venaria Reale, an UNESCO World
Heritage site in Italy close to Turin. The former residence of the
Royal House is comparable to the French Versailles. The site has
been restored over the last years and was opened to the public in
fall 2007. While there are only a few 3D reconstructions of some
buildings there is a vast archive of historic drawings and
paintings. There are frontal drawings of facades of complete
streets and the main palace’s buildings.

Figure 5: Drawing of Tempio di Diana at Reggia Venaria Reale

This vast archive is the basis of our visual time machine. With
the Reality Filters we are able to create this effect through the
display of a Sony UX Ultra Mobile PC. In order to match the
source material we are rendering the video stream like a black
and white drawing. Thus overlays of frontal drawings of
buildings onto the real field of vision are seamlessly integrated.
The whole scene looks like a real time ancient drawing. Even
visitors, guides and guards are rendered in black and white. The
application consists of three spots at the site. The first Tempio di
Diana (Figure 5) was located at the end of a long path along a
small artificial creek. It was surrounded by water and only
accessible by boat. Only ruins of the fundament are left.

Figure 6: Tempio di Diana in a reality filtered scene of the gardens

VAR. Volumen 1 Número 2. ISSN: 1989-9947
Mayo 2010

At the horizon we are displaying the drawing of Tempio di
Diana (Figure 5) on top of these ruins. Standing at a viewing
platform visitors can look around and watch through the display
of a Sony UX via video see through (Figure 6). As soon as they
are looking at the direction of the temple the video turns black
and white and the drawing of the temple is superimposed. The
Fountain d’Hercule in front of the viewing platform will be
superimposed the same way.

Figure 7: Historian watching Palazzo di Diana on Sony UX UMPC

Reggia Venaria Reale’s Palazzo di Diana’s architecture was
modified several times over the years. Each state of the buildings
was documented on drawings. We are superimposing these
drawings of the modifications of the architects Castellamonte
(1674) and Garove (1700-1713) on the facade of the main
building. Visitors standing in the large courtyard are seeing the
fountain and the current restoration of the palazzo rendered like
a drawing. While listening to the audio guide’s story about the
palazzo the buildings appearance is switching through the
centuries while seamlessly integrated into the environment
(Figure 8). Finally, the whole scene looks like a real time ancient
drawing (Figure 7).

Figure 8: Historical drawing of Palazzo di Diana and reality filtered
tourist

41

Virtual Archaeology Review

6. Conclusion

ancient content in the reality. We showed results of our
application in the area of cultural heritage, where the system runs
on an Ultra Mobile PC (Sony Vaio UX) with 15 frames/sec.

In this paper, we have presented our Augmented Reality concept
for cultural heritage sites. Its main features are the possibility to
show 2D content in very different manners, either as high
realistic or as superimposed on lookalike (modified) reality. The
adaptation of the reality is made possible by the use of
interchangeable filters that enable a better integration of the

In a future version of our system, we will investigate the
automatic detection of the right filter for the best integration of
the content in the real image.

Acknowledgements
The work discussed in this article was supported by the European Union IST framework (IST 1999-11306) project ArcheoGuide and is
continued in the current project iTACITUS (IST 2.5.10 – 034520).

References
LEPETIT V., LAGGER P., FUA P.: Randomized trees for real-time keypoint recognition. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition 2 (2005), 775–781.
VLAHAKIS, Vassilios; IOaNNIDIS, Nikos; KARIGIANNIS, John; TSOTROS, Manolis; GOUNARIS, Michael; STRICKER, Didier;
GLEUE, Tim; DAEHNE, Patrick; ALMEIDA, Luis Archeoguide: Challenges and Solutions of a Personalized Augmented Reality Guide for
archaeological sites IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 22 (2002), 5, pp. 52-60
STRICKER, Didier Tracking with Reference Images: A Real-Time and Markerless Tracking Solution for Out-Door Augmented Reality Applications
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (VAST), Glyfada, Greece, 2001, pp. 91-96.
ZOELLNER, Michael, PAGANI Alain, STRICKER, Didier: “Reality filtering: A visual time machine in augmented reality”, in VAST 2008.
Proceedings (December).
ITACITUS, 2008. “Intelligent tourism and cultural information through ubiquitous services.” http://www.itacitus.org.
FISCHER, J. 2005. Stylized augmented reality for improved immersion. Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality, 195–202.

VAR. Volumen 1 Número 2. ISSN: 1989-9947
Mayo 2010

