International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

Pathways For Harnessing The Tourism Potential Of Natural And
Cultural Sites And Features On The Nsukka Okigwe Cuesta
Livinus Chikpandu Ekechukwu
Abstract
Natural and cultural sites and features, in different parts
of the world, are important tourist attractions today
which have helped immensely in increasing wealth and
in raising the standard of living of the various
communities around which they are located.
Unfortunately, this has not been the case with Nigeria
whose landscape is replete with natural and cultural sites
such as archaeological sites of various types and
dimension. Rather than harness their potential for
tourism development and promotion in Nigeria, they
have been sacrificed to other land use activities such as
farming, road and house construction, dam and pipe-line
construction without mitigating the adverse impact of
these activities on the natural and cultural heritage. The
Nsukka –Okigwe Cuesta in south-eastern Nigeria, the
focus of this paper, is one of such areas of the country
with a significant spread of this natural and cultural sites
and features. These sites and features have been
identified and surveyed and pathways have also been
suggested for their development and promotion as
tourist attractions. It is the intention of this paper
therefore, to highlight these suggested pathways that
could be followed to enable these sites, with emphasis
on archaeological sites, to be properly harnessed for the
benefits of tourism and its development and promotion
in these areas.
Introduction
Many natural and cultural sites and features have been located in several
parts of Igboland, in South-Eastern Nigeria and they include the stone axe
factory site, iron- working sites, caves and rock- shelters, abandoned
2009

Page 273

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

habitations, groves and shrine sites. Others are historic buildings, some of
which have been declared national monuments, museums, blacksmithing
workshops, pottery, cloth and mat weaving centers. The distribution,
however, shows that a larger concentration of these sites and features is
located on the Nsukka- Okigwe cuesta, a prominent land- form feature in the
northern part of Igboland. The nature of the spatial aggregation of these sites
and features suggest that, give the present states of knowledge, we have a
higher degree of clustering of these sites and features on the cuesta than in
other parts of Igboland. This is particularly so with archaeological sites.
In an attempt to gather data that could help in achieving the objective
of inventorying, documenting and harnessing the tourism potential of the
sites and features on the cuesta, a number of data collection strategies were
adopted. Consequently, archaeological, geographical and ethnographic
methods were adopted, given the interdisciplinary orientation of the study.
The archaeological method adopted was direct observation involving mainly
systematic archaeological reconnaissance to inventorize and map all the
located sites and features on the cuesta. For site mapping, the rapid survey
methods were used.
The geographical method involved the production of a distribution
map of all the sites and features in the study area using the map- based
approach.
In this map, individual sites and features were plotted and treated as
points in order to highlight the nature of their distribution in space while
information on all the site and features in the study area was collated and
presented in a table as database for all the sites and features.
The ethnographic method involved surveys of the areas around which
the sites and features are located in order to gather relevant ethnographic
data. To achieve this objective, oral interviews were held with the local
residents and various social groups sometimes using the focus group
interview method. Another reason for the oral interviews was to find out the
people’s perception of these sites and features and to create awareness among
them about the importance of these sites and features as tourist attractions.
In order to harness the tourism potential of these sites and features
therefore, a number of pathways have been suggested. These include the
developing of tourist circuits around the located sites, developing visitor
facilities within designated sites and the involvement of the various statesholders through a participatory approach and the use of adequate publicity.
These sites when properly harnessed can be used to promote tourism in these
areas, as has been achieved with similar natural and cultural sites and features
2009

Page 274

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

in other parts of the world such as Egypt, Turkey, Zimbabwe and the United
State of America.
Definition Of Concepts
Tourism:
The word Tourism Organization (WTO) at an International Government
Conference held in Ottawa, Canada in 1991, defined Tourism as Comprising
the activities of persons travelling to and staying in places outsides their usual
environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure, business or
other purposes” (Holloway, J.C.2006)
A common definition that has been accepted for decades sees tourism
as “the temporary movement of people to destinations outside their normal
places of work and residence, the activities undertaken during their stay in
those destinations, and the facilities created to cater to their needs (Hunt, J.D
and Layne, D. 1991).
Tourist Circuit
A circuit is described as a journey or trip round a place such as sites
or monuments. The journey or tour begins from an origin to destination (s)
and ends at the origin. “Tourist circuits must be planned, mapped and tested
to give satisfaction to the visitors, economic viability to operators at modest
prices to the tourists and for optimum conservation of luring
attraction”(Okpoko, P.U. 1990).
Brief Description of the Cuesta Land Scope (see fig1)
Structurally, the Nsukka – Okigwe cuesta is a range of hills which
stand as a distinctive mark on the landscape of south- eastern Nigeria with a
spectacular combination of highlands and valleys an a symphonic diversity of
saddles and convex summits (Ezeadichie, 200:4 in Ekechukwu, 2002: 2). It is
referred to as a cuesta because of the monoclonal structure of its component
morphology (IIoeje, 1961:21; Ofomata, 1970:20). The cuesta could
conveniently be divided into three sections, namely:- the Nsukka plateau; the
Udi- Awgu Highlands and the Okigwe Scarplands.
The Nsukka Plateau which forms the northern aspect of the cuesta is
said to exhibit a distinct upland topography consisting of a summit of
between 360 and 480 meters above sea- level. The dominant physiographic
features of the Nsukka plateau land mass are the fork-like ridges trending in
the NW-SE direction from Amufi and fork-Ezike in the north toward Okpuje
2009

Page 275

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

and the numerous dome- shaped and elongated outliers in the central part of
the area.
The Udi –Awgu highlands consist of both the plateau surface and
escarpment zone. The plateau landscape of the area has an altitude of
between 320 and 400 meters, above sea –level with its highest platform
occurring at Nsude in the central area of the plateau. The escarpment zone
which starts from Enugu down to Awgu features some of the most
spectacular landforms in south- eastern Nigeria in terms of its valleys and dip
slopes.
The Okigwe scarp lands, on the other hand, is composed of the
plateau surface with a number of isolated hills and hill slopes, and an
escarpment region with a narrow strip of undulating plain. The escarpment
zone of the scarplands contains a lot of caves and rock- shelters of different
physical attributes (Okpoko and Ekechukwu, 1993), (see fig 3). These
fascinating landscape features of the Nsukka – Okigwe cuesta can be
exploited along with the several archaeological sites located on them to
promote tourism in these areas.

2009

Page 276

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

Pathways Suggested
In order to harness the tourism potential of the identified sites and features on
the Nsukka – Okigwe cuesta, a number of pathways have been suggested.
These pathways when followed could lead to the development of a viable and
sustainable tourism capable of generating a high domestic tourism traffic in
these areas and could also serve as a catalyst for domestic tourism
development in other parts of south- eastern Nigeria. Since domestic tourism
has always accounted for a greater percentage of world total tourists
movement and given the fact that the bulk of Nigeria’s tourists would usually
come from within (Okpoko, P.U.128), the need to harness the rich culture
resources of the country, such as located on the cuesta, for domestic tourism
promotion cannot be over –emphasized.
Tourist Circuits
One of the pathways suggested for harnessing the potential of these
sites and features on the cuesta is by developing tourist circuits around the
identified sites (Ekechukwu,2002: 181).
Such tourist circuits will cover important cultural & natural sites
identified on the cuesta and will incorporate important traditional institutions,
monuments and other places of historic interest. The three tourist delimited
on the cuesta are the Nsukka plateau, the Udi- Awgu highlands and the
Okigwe Scarp lands tourist circuits, respectively. These tourist circuits follow
the three geographical/ geomorphological zones earlier delimited. For each
circuit, attempt was made to identify important natural and cultural resources
that could attract the attention of tourists when harnessed and presented. Each
circuit when fully developed and properly administered will have a take –off
point and a terminus and trips could be arranged much more regularly
especially during the dry season.
The Nsukka Plateau Tourist Circuit
This circuit will incorporate important natural and cultural sites and
features on the plateau as well as craft centers, monuments and other places
of historic interest. Important archaeological sites in this circuit include the
iron-smelling sites at Lejja, Umundu, Opi, Owere-Elu, Ukehe, Idoha and
Aku, the Ogbodo –Aba catacombs (burial chambers), the Obukpa rock
shelter, Nguru Obimo cave site, the Okpe Igara and the University of Nigeria
farm site. Important craft centres identified include those of pottery, cloth and
grass weaving as well as blacksmithing centres at Umundu and EhaAlumona. Notable monuments identified include Chief Odo Nwokolo’s
2009

Page 277

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

Palace at Ukehe (this building was declared a national monument in 1964);
the Nsukka residence of Late Chief Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe (the Onuiyi Haven),
which is a personal memorial or biographical museum in its own right, Chief
Atama Nwamba’s old palace at Eha-Alumona, (see fig 2). Traditional
institutions and other places of historic interest also identified in this circuit
include the various shrines and groves associated with certain deities such as
the Adoro at Aro-Uno, the Museum village at the University of Nigeria,
Nsukka and the Institute of African Studies museum also located at the
University of Nigeria, Nsukka. Also included is the University campus itself
which could serve as the take-off or starting point of the circuit.
The Udi-Awgu Highlands Tourist Circuit
This circuit includes important archaeological sites, monuments ,
traditional institutions and places of historic interest. Notable archaeological
sites in this circuit include the iron-smelting sites at Obeagu, Uyukwe, Okwe,
Achi, Obeleagu Umuana and Umuaga: the cave sites at Obeagu which
number more than ten. Monuments and other places of historic and cultural
interest are the National Museum of Unity, Enugu; Chief Onyeama’s Old
palace at Fke, near Enugu, blacksmithing centers at Agulu-Umana, Oghe and
Umuaga; pottery, cloth and mat weaving and other craft centers at Inyi,
Obeagu, Awkananaw, Ekulu and Achi. Also included in this circuit is the
Onyeama Coal mines on the Udi highlands which is a cultural attactoin by
virtue of it’s affective value to man.

2009

Page 278

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

The Okigwe Scarplands Tourist Circuit
Like the other tourist circuits described above, the Okigwe,
Scarplands circuit includes important archeological sites, monuments and
places of historic interest and traditional institutions. The archaeological sites
include the stone-axc factory site at Ugwuele, Uturu, iron-smelting sites at
Ihube and Isu-ikwuato, the Nkoto caves at Ihube, the Uhuchkwu cave at
Ahaba Imemyi; the Omu cave at Otampkpa, the Oguagbor and Isiume
(Ngodo) at Uturu and the Uhu-Nnem Chukwu rock shelter at Ovim, the
Ulonna (Obi-nna) abandoned habitation sites at Ahaba Imenyi. Important
monuments identified in this circuit are the Ngidi moud at Ovim, Mgbe Aja
Amaeke Ovim figurines, the Amuta sacred groves and shrine, Agballa-Aku
Amuzu memorial figurines and the Obi Ahu monument in Obiaguta, Uturu,
Also included are blacksmithing workshops located at Ihube, Ugwuogu in
Uturu, Umuokogbue, Umuobiala and Amiyi Obiloaha communities of
Isuikwuato. Weaving and other craft centers in Ihube and Uturu also come
under this circuit. It is important to note that both Uturu and Ihube are famous
for mat weaving in Igboland using the mid-rib of the Pandamus Palm as their
raw materials.
The products of the wood carvers in Isiukwuato include the “Ikoro”
wooden talking drums which adorn village squares in various communities of
the area.
Each delimited circuit, when operational, should be provided with a
tourists guide/brochure for the benefit of tourists. The guide/brochure should
contain a background information about the area covered by the circuit such
as the geography of the area and the people and culture of the area. The
guide/brochure should also embody other important information such as the
description of each site within the circuit in terms of accessibility, tourist
features and other facilities available at each site. A road map of the circuit
should be included in the guide/brochure.

2009

Page 279

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

Developing Visitor Facilities within the Sites
Another avenue identified for harnessing the potential of the
abundant, archaeological and other cultural resources located on the NsukkaOkigwe cuesta, for the promotion of cultural tourism is by developing visitor
facilities within designated sites. The facility complex, often known as the
visitor centre usually include the reception/lounge area, an information
centre, a shop selling books and other items such as souvenirs related to the
site, snack bar or restaurant, an exhibit area or small museum about the site
and other facilities like toilets, parking space for cars and tour buses (Inskeep,
1991 in Ekechukeu, 2009). Well-presented information at the information
centre and the small museum (on-site museum) can help visitors/tourists
appreciate the many different values of the sites and can enrich the
experience of visiting the sites (Ekechukwu, 2002). A few examples will help
buttress the point. At Chaco Canyon in North-Western New Mexico in the
United State of American, the Native American Anasazi established a series
of settlements. The magnificent archaeological ruins of this ancient
2009

Page 280

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

community now form the Chaco Culture National Historic Park, a UNESCO
World Heritage site which is managed, by the U.S National Park Service
(NPS).
To help public/visitors appreciate the various values of the site and
also generate tourism, a “visitor centre” was built within the ruins.
The centre consists of a series of exhibition galleries in which
materials excavated from the ruins for several years now are exhibited. It also
contains photographs, maps on the Native American Anasazi. The ruins with
its associated visitor facilities attract thousands of tourists every year.
At Luxor in Egypt, is situated the tomb of Queen Nefertari, one of the
Queens of the Pharanoiac Egypt. Through a collaborative programme
between the Egyptian Antiquities Organization and the Getty Conservation
Institute in California, U.S.A the tomb’s elaborative wall paintings were
conserved and subsequently the tomb was opened to tourists who have been
visiting the site from different parts of the world (Agnew, N. 1997:6). The
tomb itself can be described as an on-site museum or a museum “in-situ” and
with the wall paintings, grave goods and other information materials such as
brochures and charts, the visitors can appreciate the various values of the
tomb and its place in Egyptian history and culture.
In line with the above examples, on-site museums or visitor
information centres can be built around some of the identified sites on the
Nsukka-Okigwe cuesta in order to achieve similar objectives. At Otobo
Dunoka in Lejja, for instance, where blocks of iron-slag are arranged at the
village square, a visitor information center or on-site museum can be built
with pictorial illustrations and other displays that could show – case the
process of iron-smelting in that area in the past. This will that doubt help to
educate and inform the public including the local inhabitants on the
significance of the slag blocks and also enlist their support in any efforts to
preserve this important cultural property. A similar thing can be done at
Ugwuele, Uturu in Okigwe to educate and inform the local inhabitants and
the visitors about the importance of those stone tools as part of the people’s
cultural heritage. At the Ugwuele stone-axe factory site, pictorial illustrations
of pervious excavations as well as stone tools can be displayed in the sitemuseum to enrich the visitors experience. The visitor centre could also
exhibit some of the unique contemporary arts and crafts of these areas to
complement the archaeological exhibits. Another pathway that could be
followed in harnessing the potential of these sites and feature for the
promotion of cultural tourism is by integrating the various traditional
festivals celebrated in the various communities on the cuesta during the year,
2009

Page 281

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

with these archaeological tours. This could be achieved by producing festival
calendars for the various circuits and planning and scheduling tours to coincide with the celebration of these festivals and routing the tours through the
venues of these festivals, sometimes these sites and features could be chosen
as the venues for these festivals. For example, the Ngidi Mound in Ovim in
Isuikwuato, the venue of the famous Ikungidi masquerade festival, could be
chosen as one of the tour destinations. Similarly, the Obinna abandoned
habitation site in Ahaba Imenyi, Isikwuato, where the founding father of
Isuikwuato clans is said to have lived in antiquity and the venue of certain
festivals involving the three clans that make up Isuikwuato in honour of their
Ogundu goddess could be another venue. Such venue can be incorporated
into the circuit and tours can be organized during the celebration of these
festivals. At the archaeological site of Ephesus in Turkey, an international
festival known as the international Ezmir festival is usually held in the
ancient theater at the ruins of Ephesus (Torre and Maclean 1992:12).
It is important to note, that the Igbo communities, on the NsukkaOkigwe cuesta, along with their other Igbo neigbours have rich cultural
festivals some of which are celebrated annually.
Among the Igbo communities of the Nsukka Plateau, the Omabe
masquerade festival is widely celebrated. In Ukehe communities, the Odo,
the cult that symbolizes their ancestors and dead relations like the Omabe, is
celebrated along with other festivals. In the Okigwe scarplands, the people of
Isuikuwuato are associated with a number of cultural festivals like the
“Ajala-Ebe”, “Oke-Ekpe”, Ahia-Ehgwu and the “Ajonkwu” festivals, among
others. The Uturu communities also celebrate a variety of festivals like the
“Oru-nta”, “Achi-Cha”, “Gbudugu” festivals, among others.
These
abundant and rich cultural festivals can be harnessed and embodied in the
various circuits to boost and enrich the tours in these circuits.
Stake-Holder Involvement and Adequate Publicity
In order to meaningfully plan and develop the natural and cultural
resources there is the need to adopt a participatory approach that will involve
all the stake-holders. Some of the identified stake- holders include members
of the local communities in the areas where these sites are located, the Local
Government Tourism communities in these areas, the State Tourism Boards,
the Councils for Arts and Culture in these States, the National Commission
for Museums and Monuments and the Nigeria Tourism Development
Corporation. These government agencies in charge of tourism matters should
collaborate with representatives of these communities where these sites are
2009

Page 282

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

located to plan and develop them into Tourists products that could generate a
huge flow of Tourist traffic. These agencies along with the local communities
can also partner with the private sector such as site developers, tour operating
companies, property companies, to realize the above objectives. In order to
reach the target markets both within and outside the local communities, the
need for adequate publicity cannot be over emphasized. Publicity using the
appropriate language and materials will help to attract visitors to the sites.
Publicity materials that could be used include the tour brochure (manual of
electric), bill-boards, production of souvenirs embossed with the pictures of
the sites. The use of brochures, both manual and electronic, as a marketing
tool for advertising and promoting tourist products across the world, has
become a common practice today. Information on important cultural and
natural attractions in Nigeria should be made available on the worldwide web
in order to create awareness about them and arouse some curiosity in the
minds of people in Nigeria’s primary tourism markets (Ekechukwu 2009:16).
Promotional campaign using the various media of communication should be
used to advertise the various circuits and for creating tourism awareness
among the people of these areas.

Discussion of Conclusion
Natural and cultural sites and features that have survival from the past
such as those located on the Nsukka-Okigwe custa can be transformed into
tourist attractions. This is been achieved with sites and feature in different
parts of the world such as Egypt, Turkey, Zimbabwe and the United States of
America. When these sites are developed into tourist attractions, it could
create the demand for goods and services which may, in turn, lead to the
creation and expansion of some local industries. If the archeological sites at
Ihube and Uturu are developed into tourist attractions, the demand for some
local crafts like mats and hats produced from the Pandamus palm, that grow
in the area, will increase, this could lead to a boost in the local economy.
Similarly, the development of tourism in general and cultural tourism in
particular, have often led to the provision and improvement in rural
infrastructural facilities such as motorable roads, local airstrips, water and
electricity supply. These public utilities are usually provided or extended to
the rural communities where these sites are located. If such facilities are
provided by the interested private sectors such as tour operating agencies or
2009

Page 283

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

site developer or by government agencies for the comfort of tourists, they are
at the same time being made available to be local communities of these areas.
Besides, tourism is known to create jobs at various levels that are
essential to the growth of the rural and national economies of a country. For
instance, tourist guides, interpreters and site managers could be recruited
from within the local communities by the tour operators, Local Government
Tourism Committees or the State Tourism Boards, when these sites are
developed and become operational. The stakeholders such as the Local
Government Tourism Communities, the State Tourism Boards, in the states
around the cuesta such as Enugu, Imo and Abia, should join forces with the
local communities in these areas to harness the abundant tourism potential of
these sites and features. This could go a along way in generating a viable and
suitable cultural tourism in this part of the country with the accompanying
socio-economic benefits.
Tourism in general and heritage tourism, in particular, has made giant
strides in the socio-economic development and prosperity of many nations.
Nigeria with abundant natural and cultural resources can take advantage of
these by developing her rich sites and features, especially those located on the
Nsukka-Okigwe cuesta, to promote tourism through the various pathways
enumerated above.

References
Agnew, Neville, 1997. “Preservation of archeological sites: A holistic
Perspective”. Conservation, The GCI Newsletter, 2:2.
Angew, N. & Martha Demas, 2008”. Envisioning a future for the valley of the
Queens”. The GCI & SCA Collaborative Project. The GCI
Newsletter, 23:2.
Consultant field survey, 1984. Government of Imo State, Ministry of Works
and Transport, Department of Lands, survey and Urban
Development, Planning Studies in Imo State.

2009

Page 284

International Journal of Research in Arts and Social Sciences

Vol 1

Ekechukwu, L. C. 2002, Tourism Potential of Archaeological Sites in
Igboland: Nsukka- Okigwe Cuesta as a case –study. Unpublished
Ph.D Thesis, Department of Archaeology, U.N.N.
Ekechukwu, L. C. “Preserving the past for the future: Archaeological
Heritage Management in Nigeria. Nsukka Journal of Humanities;
Vol. 17 Forthcoming.
Ezeadichie, E. U. 2000. “Land use and the Spatial Distribution and
Protection of Archaeological sites in the Nsukka-Okigwe Cuesta
S.E. Nigeria. Unpublished Ph.D Thesis, Department of
Archaeology. UNN.
Iloeje, N. P 1961. The structure and Relief of the Nsukka-Okigwe cuesta,
Nigerian geographical journal: 4:21-39.
Ofomata, G. E. K. 1970. Major trends in the geomorphological evolution of
the Nsuka- Okigwe cuesta, East Central State. Paper at the. 15th
Annual Conference of the Nigerian Geographical Association.
University of lfe, December 18-23.
Okpoko, P. U. 1990. The Role of Cultural Resource in Tourism in Nigeria.
WAJA, Vol 20:126-135.
Okpoko and Ekechukwu: 1993: Archaeological surveys of Okigwe and its
environs, Eastern Nigeria: A Prelim. Report. W. A. J. A. 23.146168.
Torre, M. & Maclean, M. 1997. The Archaeology Heritage in the
Mediterranean Region. Conversation, The GCI Newsletter, 12:2.
Instep, E. 1991. Tourism Planning: An Integrated and Sustainable
Development Approach. New York. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

2009

Page 285

