See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283592833

The narrator: A smart data ofﬂoading system for interactive navigation in
museums
Article · February 2015
DOI: 10.1109/ICENCO.2014.7050448

CITATIONS

READS

0

100

1 author:
Ahmed Salah EL-Din Ali
Helwan University
23 PUBLICATIONS 86 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Caching D2D communication for Cellular Networks View project

handover in mobile atm View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Ahmed Salah EL-Din Ali on 03 October 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

2014 10th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO)

The Narrator: A Smart Data Offloading System for Interactive
Navigation in Museums
A. S. Ali, Member, IEEE
Department of Communications and Electronics, Faculty of Engineering-Helwan University – Egypt

Abstract— Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) are extremely important for sustainable development
for all countries. It can be used to make information available
in the right form to the right user at the right time in faster and
better way. Archeological sites, museums and old towns are
some of the fields that can take great advantages of such
technologies. These places need a particular ICTs
infrastructure and services to convert these physical locations
into useful smart environments. In this paper we present the
narrator; a system that assist visitors of such places and
automatically delivering them in a smart manner with the
required information according to their current position in this
site. The key idea of the suggested system is to integrate
Location Based Service (LBS) technology, data offloading,
Wi-Fi networks and recommender algorithm to realize a smart
self-guide system. This system is able to detect visitor
position, create visitor profile, recommend a visiting map,
interact with the visitor, and finally offload the textual and
multimedia data to visitor’s device as if it makes objects of the
site able to talk and narrate their story to visitors. The results
of our suggested system showed that the narrator guarantees
on-demand information delivery for large number of visitors
simultaneously in the same site with high QoS and without
service interruption or failure. In addition, the proposed
system efficiently solves the run down problem due to the
limited system bandwidth of the wireless networks.
Index Terms— ICT, Wi-Fi, Data offloading, QoS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Archeological sites and museums hold large amounts of
antiquities, artifacts, and artworks [1]. This vast wealth seeks
the whole world to see it and know its story, but unfortunately
it lies in its place and could not tell its story and secrets to its
visitors. As well as it cannot tell if any one tries to tamper or
stole it. On the other hand, tourism plays an important role in
the investment and the economics of countries. It can secure
foreign exchange earnings, employment and regional
development [2]. Therefore to attract more tourists as well as
local visitors, archeological sites and museums must provide
attractive and interactive personalized services to meet
individual needs.
In most of museums, visitors move from room to room and
from object to object and read information from labels which
is not significant for most of visitors. As a main issue, one
problem is that the demand for guides at these sites will
increase as the number of tourists increased. On the other

©2014 IEEE

hand, there may not be a sufficient number of trained guides
and if they existed they will be offered only for groups of
visitors at certain times. While it is neither economical nor
feasible to provide each visitor with a human guide, some of
the flexibility and personalization of a one-to-one tour would
be a valuable way to enhance the museum experience. One
solution is to provide electronic devices to visitors including
headsets, and audio playback devices. Visitors can listen to
pre-recorded file which is not interactive or interesting and not
cope with visitor demands [3]. Several approaches have been
proposed in the literatures. These approaches allow visitors to
interact with an automatic guide in museums. An approach
using mobile phones was proposed in [4] but their recognition
technique is limited. In a few cases, museums may present
information through electronic guide books [5]. However,
when visitors need to get more information, they asked to
browse a lengthy list and query the required information
which is always a cumbersome task. Querying, search time,
and the locating effort interrupt the visiting fun and benefit.
Instead and in order to make the museum guide interesting, it
must be dynamic and attractive by having a variety of
multimedia content which delivered in an intelligent manner.
Technically, the location-awareness technologies used for
indoor applications (such as museum guides) are the shortranged ultrasonic, infrared or radio signals [6]. Most of similar
works are not focus on technology rather they concentrate on
its application and in creating innovative services. In indoor
case, where Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, ZigBee connectivity or RFID
sensor networks are used, coverage may be incompletely for
all the site as well as bandwidth may be reduced as the number
of visitors increases [7-11]. As an example, in [12] which is
one of the recent projects in this context that working in Italy,
the authors present a service platform to make objects of a
museum exhibition able to talk during user’s visit. This project
based on using wireless sensor network and Bluetooth
technology to sense the surrounding area for detecting user
devices’ presence. When a device has been detected, a
multimedia story of the closest museum objects is transmitted
to the user. One disadvantage of this system is always run and
objects almost continuously talking even if the visitor walking
beside this object but he didn’t want to listen to this story. In
addition, and due to using of Bluetooth technology, there is a
limitation for the total number of users that can be handled
concurrently. For these reasons and to provide better
performance it should be preferable to provide a smart
narrating system in which the object starts to narrate its story
only when visitor ordered it.
According to its greatness, Egyptian museums and
exhibitions are expected that there are large numbers of

2014 10th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO)
visitors and then they will suffer from congestion. Therefore,
and to tackle this situation problem, a smart guide system
based on a scalable and dynamic applications that will be
available through deployment cloud in the museum is
required. Using ICT infrastructure and application services,
we can convert the antiquities and artifacts to a smart narrator
that answer when it is asked.
In this paper, we introduce a smart narrator system for
archeological sites, exhibitions and museums around the world
and especially for the Egyptian museums. The narrator system
offers a full control solution including how a visitor log in the
system, authentication, management, and IP address
assignment. The narrator guarantees on-demand information
delivery for large number of visitors simultaneously in the
same site with high QoS and without service interruption or
failure. The key idea of the suggested system is to integrate
Location Based Service (LBS) technology, data offloading,
Wi-Fi networks and recommender algorithm to realize a smart
self-guide system.
The narrator delivers multimedia data to visitor’s device in
gradual manner according to visitor current location, visitor’s
profile, and his choices. Consequently, it is expected that
smart data offloading system with efficient recommended
algorithm using Wi-Fi network accomplished by local control
unit will be able to remotely manage, monitor and serve much
more concurrent visitors and delivering all of them with the
required data with high QoS. Fully monitoring, managing and
controlling the visitor’s trip lead to enhance service efficiency
of the system, adjusting the visitor’s distribution inside the
museum to avoid service interruptions or failure and finally
saving antiquities from tamper or stole.
A number of key challenges are featured in such system.
One of these challenges is the maximum number of visitors
can be served concurrently in each room. Another challenge is
how to distribute visitors around all rooms of the museum to
avoid congestion in any room. Finally how it can force the
visitors choices to achieve maximum throughput over all the
system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II,
introduces the motivations and technologies. In section III, the
suggested system architecture is presented. Section IV
presents the system operation. The results and discussion is
provided in section V. Section VI, concludes the paper.

II. MOTIVTIONS AND TECHNOLOGIES
The main goal of our proposed system is to make visiting
museum and exhibition more interesting and attractive. Most
of visitors especially local visitors are always not able to be
given tour at the museum. The final impression and visiting
outcomes for the visitors depends on the skills of the guides
who accompanying to them. A self-guide interactive system
is designed to provide relevant information for each antique
according to visitor profile and selections. This makes
tourists have fun and enjoy the stories behind each antique
and let them imagine and like to live that era of time.
In order to achieve these features in our proposed system,
we have to use technologies and devices that must be as
friendly as possible for visitors use. Through a cloud system

©2014 IEEE

and using a smart recommender algorithm, our system will
suggest to the visitor a complete navigation map for his/her
tour inside the museum (in the rest of the paper we will take
museums as an example for all archeological sites). The
recommended journey schedule depends on the sequence and
decade of the presented antiquities in museum as well as
visitor profile. Moreover the visitor has the opportunity to
accept this suggestion partially or completely, as well as he
can plan his own journey map. In all cases, the narrator
system will prepare a Visitor Information Tree (VIT) for each
user based on his decision. Each VIT starts with the first
𝑁
antique 𝑎𝑟𝑖
that the visitor “i” select item “a” which has
number “r” in room “N” to start his tour from it. The tree
𝑁
structure starts with 𝑎𝑟𝑖
and branched according to the local
room that contain this antique and its decade and continued
with the suggested items in the next two levels. If the visitor
next visit (selection) matched with the suggested tree, VIT
will be extended to the next level. Otherwise the VIT i will be
upgraded according to the new selection. Instantly, a series of
data and multimedia files for each item are ready to be
delivered to this visitor through data offloading algorithm.
Actually, data offloading is a set of techniques used to move
traffic from core networks to other local network in order to
enable optimum utilization of network resources. A robust
data offload solution can provide us the flexibility to control
data flow across the narrator network based on visitor’s type,
class of service, traffic pattern to achieve maximum QoS
[13]. One of the main complementary network technologies
used for data offloading is Wi-Fi that is costly less to build
than other LANs. On the other hand, the physical nature of
the archeological sites and most of museums forced us to
depend on wireless network connections between visitor’s
devices and our narrator system. Wi-Fi has the advantage of
ubiquity and unlicensed spectrum characteristics that make it
as an attractive solution for our proposed system. In addition,
Wi-Fi is efficient for large file downloads in terms of battery
usage and duration of signal; therefore users enjoy a better
user experience through higher data throughput [14].
As we will see in the next section, the Wi-Fi access point
will be connected to the core network through optical fiber
cables. Optical fiber has many advantages includes that it
offers longer distances without requiring repeaters as well as
it provides a huge amount of potential bandwidth exceeds
that provided by any other transmission medium [15].
Combining the advantages of optical fiber (capacity and
ranges) with the advantages of Wi-Fi (ubiquity and mobility)
are attractive for our proposed system since they provide a
powerful platform that can be reliable in all services.
Location-Based Services (LBS) are a set of applications that
integrate available information of geographical locations with
a service system in order to make these information are
ubiquitous and pervasive. It can be used to identify a location
of person or object and it can be used in a variety of fields
such as indoor object search, health, entertainment, and
personal life [16]. Users of LBS benefit from the interaction
with the system where it can provide them with all required
information about the location and the objects it contain. We
will use LBS as query-based system to provide the visitor
with the useful information he required.

2014 10th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO)

III. THE SUGGESTED SYSTEM
ARCHITECTURE

Authentication Server
Data Center

This section describes the components and the overall
architecture of the proposed system. The structural overview
of the proposed system supporting the narrator system is
showed in Fig. 1. The suggested system configured in
hierarchical based and will be depend on various concepts
including location detection, context awareness, data
offloading, and smart environment. In this architecture, a
hybrid cloud offload infrastructure is organized as two level
hierarchies combining the core cloud with local clouds. The
first level of this architecture is a large centralized core which
is the base of system administration and data offloading. This
cloud is located in a stable and secure environment, far from
physical threats. At the edge of the architecture there are
Offload Elements (OEs) providing local clouds for mobile
visitors. These elements are distributed and each is located in
each room close to the mobile devices that it will serve. In
other words, two types of data offload are identified for
mobile visitors: Radio Access Network (RAN) offload and
core network offload. These are distinct in that they target
different parts of the network and impact visitors differently.
In particular, we have deployed a particular wireless spot site
that using Wi-Fi technology which will be used to detect and
communicate with visitor’s devices. Each spot site will serve
visitors they detected in its room and starts offload
information to them according to their traffic order. The main
components of our proposed system include: server-side
(Authentication, Content management, and Database servers),
core network switch, local offload element, Wi-Fi Access
Point (AP), visitor Smart Device (SD), a set of software
applications (Narrator services), and guide’s visitor interface.
We expect that in most cases, the visitors prefer to read textual
descriptions for presented objects. Therefore, this introductory
information will be stored in the cache memory of the offload
element in each room. In other words, only the introductory
data is stored in the local offload elements while the core
cloud store all site data including visitors profile,
authentication data, textual and multimedia information. The
cloud and the employed wireless network will offer the
required information to visitors in form of audio, video,
textual and hypermedia documents. The delivered information
to visitor’s devices will be offered in a customized manner and
based on the visitor profile as well as the network status.
The server-side contains a set of servers including the
Authentication Server (AS), Content Management Server
(CMS) and Data Center (DC). The authoring system works
offline in advance to feed the related information and
multimedia files that contain to the CMS. Creation of visitor’s
profiles, the visitor tree map and its update as well as content
management will be handled by the CMS. The DC stores all
textual and multimedia files for all objects in the museum. All
servers, offload elements and SDs work in real-time to interact
visitors with the narrator system. Servers and offload elements
are responsible for responding to visitors’ requests.

©2014 IEEE

Management Content
Serrver

Optical Fiber Cable

Switch
OE

OE
Ch9

Ch7

Ch5

User

Ch2

Ch8

7

8

9

4

R2

R3

R4

2

6

R5

R1

R6

5

9

R7

R8

R9

7

2

3

4

Ch7

Ch3

Ch1

Ch4

Ch9

Ch6

Ch9

Ch7

User

Fig. 1. The system architecture.
To guarantee large bandwidth and so high data rates to
support the multimedia traffic for a large number of
concurrently visitors, optical fiber cables through core
network switch is used for the connection between servers and
offload elements. On the other side and in order to achieve the
ubiquity and dispersed, visitors’ SD connected to the system
using Wi-Fi technology. As shown in Fig. 1, the available
Radio Frequency (RF) channels in Wi-Fi access point will be
distributed over the neighboring rooms in a way to prevent the
mutual interference and reduce chances of collision.
Consequently, visitors will request the object information
from the OE (with object ID) which in turn forward this
request to the CMS. Then the CMS retrieves required
information from the DC and offloads it to visitor’ SD through
the involved OE using a selected RF channel. One of the
advantages of our proposed system is the flexibility of
arranging the APs and their RF channels based on each room
area, number of suggested visitors to visit this room
simultaneously and the number of antiquities in this room.

IV. THE NARRATOR SYSTEM OPERATION
The flowchart of the proposed narrator system operation is
showed in Fig. 2. When the visitor turns on his/her SD and run
the narrator application, the narrator sends a welcome message
to him and the narrator system operation starts with the
registration process. Each visitor should register his SD to the
system by entering the user name and password that he got
from the system operation in the museum (Login phase). In
the personalize and recommendation phase, the narrator will
give the visitor a time limited IP address allowing him to
navigate through the museum and listen to the story of the
Egyptian pharaoh’s civilization. Subsequently, the system
starts to determine the visitor profile by asking him a group of
questions such as age, educational level, interest, favorite, .etc.
Each visitor starts his journey by listening to the suggested
navigation map from the narrator system according to his
interest. On the other hand, during system installation and
configuration, each OE self-provisions the introductory

2014 10th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO)
information from the core network. Therefore, any visitor does
not need to directly communicate with the core during offload
operation; it only needs to communicate with its OE. When
the visitor enters any room, his SD will be connected to the
OE in this room. This OE will send list of all objects that its
room has and allow the visitor to select any one of them to
start narrating. Once the visitor selects the object, the OE
using the brief data stored in its local RAM, will starts to
narrate the brief story of this object on the visitor’s SD. In the
meantime, the OE will also send a request control signal
accomplished by the visitor ID and object ID to the CMS to
prepare the full information about this object to be ready for
offloading on demand. After the brief story is finished, the
visitor has the choice to require more information about this
object or move to next one. According to the visitor choice,
the OE will send confirm or deny message to CMS to inform
it for offloading or canceling the previous order. In case of
confirming, the multimedia information will be forwarded
from the DBS to visitor’s SD through the OE. This process
will be repeated for all objects in the navigation tour for all
visitors.
The recommender algorithm in the CMS recommends
suitable VIT map for each visitor. The visitor confirmation or
selection stage allows visitors to choose between the system
recommendations or selects his own selection. Once the visitor
selects an object, he is asked to select the information level he
wants to start. For each object, there are three levels of
information, Data & Voice, Presentation, and video. Each
level includes unique multimedia contents. According to his
selection and network status, the visitor will view and listen to
one of the greatest stories that will hear in his life. The
narrator system will automatically selects a suitable VIT map
for each user based on his profile, but the visitor can also
choose a different start point manually. After the visitor read,
listen or watched the required information, the narrator asks
the visitor which next step he wants. Depending on the
visitor’s answer, the system determines the next stage and
updates the VIT map and informs the visitor with this updates.
The system retrieves the visitor profile each time the visitor
moves to another object to update it. When the visitor enters
any room and selects an object from the object list of this
room, the detailed data and recommendations of the object is
offloaded from the OE via the Wi–Fi network.
The key element of the traffic type selection phase is the
Wi-Fi network capacity. Therefore, and to ensure system
stability and a deliverables high QoS, we put certain
constrains for the total number of visitors attached to the
system in general and the maximum number attached to each
room. In addition, a distribution algorithm will be used to
arrange the traffic type selection to prevent network
interruption or failure. This procedures guarantee that visitors
always get the optimum scenario for his journey in the
museum. As a result of this limitation, the recommender
algorithm responds to each request (Attending a room or
moving to higher data level) according to the already existing
visitors inside this room and the offloaded traffic of each one.
Accordingly, the narrator system will positively respond to
number of visitors (starts to offload data to them) while block
others and redirecting them to another room or asked them to
wait some time until the required bandwidth is available. The

©2014 IEEE

visitor has the choice to leave to another object/room or wait
his turn to be served in this room which will be done in a
prioritized manner.
The visitor starts Narrator
application

Application
GUI

Login Phase

Welcome
and
Registration

Recommendation
Phase

Traffic Type
Selection
Phase

Offloading
Phase

Check
Network
Status

VIT & next
step
recommender

Visitor
Confirnation

Creation
Visitor
Profile

Multimedia
Choice

/ Selection

Start
Narrating

Data
Offloading

The Narrator starts
the story

Fig. 2. The Flowchart of the Narrator system.
The network status check stage ensures a stable and robust
connection. To overcome the problem of the system run out of
the system resources, the network status checker cyclically
monitors the system resources and may be block or postpone a
service required by a visitor. The data offload stage is
concerned with offloading the required data once the
connection is available.
Finally, the narrator not only narrate the stories for visitors
but also it will tell the control center if any antique suffer from
tamper or moved from its location. Once the visitor starts his
tour, the system will record his movement and which rooms
and items he visit. Accordingly at the end of the tour for any
visitor the system has a recorded file for the complete
navigation movement for that visitor. At the end of each day
the system gives a report about the number of visitors and
listed file for each user linked with his recorded file. If any
antique is disappeared or moved from its location, the system
gives a report having a list of the visitors of this antique and
who is the last visitor and at what time is the last visit. The
narrator can also be used in case of emergency cases, where an
emergency message can be broadcast to all visitors via their
smart devices and show them the positions of emergency
exists.
One of the important issues in Wi-Fi data offloading is to
determine how much data Wi-Fi can offload. The performance
of Wi-Fi data offloading is related to Wi-Fi coverage,
maximum throughput, user mobility, traffic type, required
QoS and delay tolerance characteristics of user data
applications.

2014 10th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO)

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we will evaluate the performance of the
proposed system in terms of the total throughput required to
support the served visitors, and the blocking probability for
visitors try to attend to the system or request higher level of
information. Firstly, and in order to show powerful of our
system we will find results for the previous parameters for the
system neither using recommending algorithm nor limiting the
number of attended visitors to any room, figures 3, 4, 5. Then
we will repeat assuming limited number of visitors attended to
each room, figures 6, 7. Finally, Fig. 8 shows the results for
the narrator system using both the recommender and limitation
on visitor’s numbers. In each scenario we present the results
for the most popular Wi-Fi protocols used nowadays, 802.11a,
b, g and 802.11n.We assume that each visitor can request a
higher order of information in three different forms, Data and
Voice (D&V), Presentations (Pres.), and Video.

Fig. 5. Blocking Probability Vs Total Number of Attended
visitors
As shown in Fig. 5, when the number of attended visitors
increased, the blocking probability will increased to the extent
that more than half of the visitors can’t be served when
visitors exceeds 65. Of course increasing the system capacity
using 802.11n protocol will enhance the performance and
decrease the blocking probability where in this case more than
half of the visitors will be blocked when visitors exceeds 100.

Fig. 3. Required Throughput Vs Time.
Figure 3, shows the required throughput for each type of
traffic as well as the total required throughput against time. As
can be seen, video traffic consumes the higher percentage
while data and voice consume low percentage. As there is no
any limitation on the number of visitors, the required
throughput is increased nearing Gbps which is too costly to
provide it wirelessly in each room.

Fig. 6. Required throughput Vs Time.
In the second scenario we have identified the total number of
visitors allowed to attend to any room. Figure 6, shows the
required throughput against time, in this case and due to the
applied limitation the throughput didn’t exceeds 500 Mbps
while most of time it is around 360 Mbps which is better
compared to the first scenario. Obviously the required
throughput for video files form the overall shape of the total
throughput curve. Furthermore, even though there is slightly
difference in the blocking probability in case of 802.11a, b, g
due to the limited system bandwidth, the blocking was
improved using the 802.11n protocol and up to 75 visitors will
be served without any blocking as shown in Fig. 7.

Fig. 4. Total Required Throughput Vs Arrival rate
Actually and as predicted, as the arrival rate increased the
total required throughput increased dramatically to very large
values of Mbps and more as shown in Fig. 4. It is also
important to note that offloading of video files has the upper
hand in the total required throughput.

©2014 IEEE

Fig. 7. Blocking Probability Vs Total Number of Attended
visitors

2014 10th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO)
Figure 8, shows the required throughput for our narrator
system where both recommender and limitation on visitor’s
numbers are applied. In this scenario we control both the
number of visitors for each room as well as the traffic type
that allowed to request according to the available system
bandwidth. Therefore, the total required throughput will be
around 50 Mbps for 802.11 a, b, g and around 300 Mbps for
802.11n. Consequently, there will no blocking in the room
level because the recommender early handles this situation by
redirecting the visitors according to the instant system status.

Fig. 8. Required throughput Vs Time.

VI. CONCLUSION
Archeological sites and museum has greater attraction
factor for tourism all over the world. Countries are aiming to
offer high quality – low cost services which provide
interesting and understanding these sites and places.
The main idea of our narrator system presented in this paper is
to convert silent objects in museum and sites to fluent narrator
that tell his story behind the decade. One of the advantages of
our system is that it can provide information and multimedia
content in advance such that a fast fetch for the detailed
explanation of contents is possible.
The results we have obtained emphasize that our suggested
system match the number of visitors and their offload traffic to
the available system bandwidth.
As a future work, we are currently investigating how the
served number of visitors can be increased using virtual
offloading groups inside each room.
REFERENCES
[1] Ryan, N.S., Smart Environments for Cultural Heritage,
24th International Research Symposium, International
Research Center for Japanese Studies, Kyoto, Feb. 2005.
[2] Ryan, N.S., T. S. Cinotti, G. Raffa, “Smart Environment
and their Applications to Cultural Heritage,” A workshop
held in conjunction with UbiComp’05, Tokyo, Japan, 11
Sept.,2005.
[3] Bonfigli, M.E., Calori, L., Guidazzoli, A. Mauri, M.A.,
Melotti, M.: Tailored virtual tours in Cultural Heritage
worlds, Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH’00, New Orleans, 2000.
[4] P. F¨ockler, T. Zeidler, and O. Bimber. Phoneguide:
Museum guidance supported by on-device object
recognition on mobile phones. Research Report 54.74
54.72, Bauhaus-University Weimar, Media Faculty, Dept.
Augmented Reality, 2005.

©2014 IEEE
View publication stats

[5] L. W. Chan, Y.SV, Y. P. Hung, and J. Y. Jen
“Orientation- Aware hand helds for panorama-based
Museum Guiding System” UbiComp 05, , Tokyo, Japan,
Sept. 11-14, 2005.
[6] Vlahakis, V., Demiris, A., Bounos, E. and Ioannidis, N.,
A novel Approach to Context-Sensitive Guided e-Tours
in Cultural Sites: “Light” Augmented Reality on PDAs, in
Chrysanthou, Y., Cain, K., Silberman, N. & Niccolucci,
F. Nick Ryan, Tullio Salmon Cinotti, Giuseppe Raffa
(eds), VAST 2004, 5th International Symposium on
Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural
Heritage, December 2004.
[7] F. Amato, A. Chianese, V. Moscato, A. Picariello, G.
Sperli, SNOPS: “A smart environment for cultural
heritage applications” Proceedings of the twelfth
International Workshos on Web Information and Data
Management (WIDM 2012 in conjunction with CIKM),
pp. 49–56, 2012.
[8] P. Bihler, P. Imhoff, A. B. Cremers: SmartGuide – A
Smartphone Museum Guide with Ultrasound Control,
Procedia Computer. Science 5 (2011) pp. 586–592.
[9] U.B. Ceipidor, C.M. Medaglia, V. Volpi, A. Moroni, S.
Sposato, M. Carboni, A. Caridi, NFC technology applied
to touristiccultural field: A case study on an Italian
museum, Proc. of the 5th International Workshop on Near
Field Communication, 2013.
[10] E. Rukzio, S. Wetzstein, A. Schmidt, A framework for
mobile interactions with the physical world, Proceedings
of Wireless Personal Multimedia Communication
(WPMC’05), 2005.
[11] F. Sparacino, Natural interaction in intelligent spaces:
Designing for architecture and entertainment, Multimedia
Tools Appl,. 38(3), 2008, pp. 307–335C.
[12] F. Amato, A. Chianese, A. Mazzeo, V. Moscato, A.
Picariello, and F. Piccialli, “The Talking Museum
Project” The 4th Int. Conference on Emerging Ubiquitous
Systems and Pervasive Networks, EUSPN 2013.
[13] D. Srinivasan, J. Dey, S. Kumar, R. N. Mukherjee “ Data
Offload Approaches for Mobile Operations Improving
Network Efficiency and Strengthening QoS”, Wipro
technologies, 2012.
[14] K. Lee, J. Lee, Y. Yi, I. Rhee, and S. Chong,, “Mobile
Data Offloading: How Much Can WiFi Deliver?”,
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING,
VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2013.
[15] W. Fischer, A. Shami, M. Maier, and C. Assi, “Point-topoint FTTx,” in Broadband Access Networks:
Technologies and Deployments, Eds., Springer,
NewYork, NY,USA, 2009.
[16] B. Guo, S. Satake, M. Imai. Home-Explorer: Ontologybased Physical Artifact Search and Hidden Object
Detection System. Mobile Information Systems, Vol. 4
No.2 (2008), 81–103, IOS Press, 2008.
[17] R. Giuliano, F. Mazzenga, M. Petracca, and F. Vatalaro,
“Application of Radio Frequency Identification for
Museum Environment,” IEEE 22nd International
Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for
Collaborative Enterprises (WETICE), 2013.

