econstor

A Service of

zbw

Make Your Publications Visible.

Leibniz-Informationszentrum
Wirtschaft
Leibniz Information Centre
for Economics

Tosic, Violeta; Lazarevic, Sanja

Article

The role of libraries in the development of cultural
tourism with special emphasis to the Bibliotheca
Alexandria in Egypt
UTMS Journal of Economics
Provided in Cooperation with:
University of Tourism and Management, Skopje

Suggested Citation: Tosic, Violeta; Lazarevic, Sanja (2010) : The role of libraries in the
development of cultural tourism with special emphasis to the Bibliotheca Alexandria in Egypt,
UTMS Journal of Economics, ISSN 1857-6982, University of Tourism and Management, Skopje,
Vol. 1, Iss. 2, pp. 107-114

This Version is available at:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/49176
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:

Terms of use:

Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.

Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your
personal and scholarly purposes.

Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.

You are not to copy documents for public or commercial
purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them
publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise
use the documents in public.

Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.

www.econstor.eu

If the documents have been made available under an Open
Content Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you
may exercise further usage rights as specified in the indicated
licence.

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

Review
Received: 22.03.2010

THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL TOURISM
WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS TO THE
BIBLIOTHECA ALEXANDRINA IN EGYPT
Violeta Tosic
Sanja Lazarevic
College of Tourism, Belgrade, Serbia 1

Abstract:
Cultural tourism has grown rapidly in the past few decades as a result of more income, higher levels of
education, globalization processes that make the world a smaller place, technology, the effects of media and
telecommunications and new types of cultural attractions. Libraries, as cultural institutions, may contribute
significantly to the development of cultural tourism. One good example is the role of Bibliotheca
Alexandrina in Egypt.
Key words: culture, cultural tourism, heritage, libraries, Bibliotheca Alexandrina.

INTRODUCTION
Culture is a very important factor of economic development due to its links with
lifestyle, geographic areas and close link between education and society. Bearing in
mind the importance of the European cultural heritage, the EU supports a lot of
projects. By digitalizing their working process, libraries have become one of the key
factors behind the social development based on knowledge and run by digital
technology. They have possibility to provide direct online access through personal
computers, means for online studying, information important for e-commerce
improvement and the like. Libraries can contribute to the development of local
economies supporting local trade and tourism industry.
This paper aims to briefly show the role of Alexandria Library in the development
of tourism based on cultural and artistic resources of a region.

1

Violeta Tosic, Ph.D., Professor, Sanja Lazarevic, College of Tourism, Belgrade, Serbia.

107

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

THE LIBRARY RESOURCES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL
TOURISM
In terms of cultural tourism, culture should be seen as part of tourism development. It
means that culture, based on its links with lifestyle, geographic area and close link
between education and society, is a necessary prerequisite for tourism development.
Culture and tourism are in terms of their basic characteristics two complex and
layered fields of the modern civilization, and they have a positive effect on the overall
social development. Making culture less important in terms of tourism is neither logical
nor justified, because culture is overall intellect of society, and tourism is a sum of all
material and spiritual resources and lifestyle of a nation.
There are several aspects for defining cultural tourism:
• From economic point of view, cultural tourism is the placement of culture on the
market with cultural and artistic product, which has cultural and economic
value.
• From organizational point of view, it is the integration between two sectors,
culture and tourism, which should merge with a view to forming a mutual
product.
• From cultural point of view, it is a promotion of revived cultural goods and the
landscape of a town that will be etched on tourists’ minds.
• From educational point of view, it is a journey full of longing to explore, get to
know and learn something new about national and local cultural values of the
region tourists are visiting.
• From a viewpoint of marketing and PR, cultural tourism is the managing of the
reputation of a place, a region or a country based on cultural goods and
landscapes.
The motives for traveling to and staying in cultural-social area contain aspiration
for fulfilling a large number of deferent and vehement human needs and wishes. It can
be a wish for gaining knowledge, discovering and getting to know various regions and
civilizations, a visit to various cultural events, art, adventure, change, freedom, the
change of the itinerary etc. Among the special ones are: a trip to the past, small town
visits and other countries, a visit to natural and cultural areas, exploration trips,
seminars, getting to know the life and work of an artist, and for the sake of rest,
recreation as well as for health reasons and the like.
By definition, cultural tourism enables the places that are not primarily tourismoriented and are not rich in tourist throughout a year to make a tourism offer owing to
their cultural and artistic resources. Thus, the main aim of cultural tourism is to
motivate people to travel and become acquainted with local cultural values in order to
understand them and consequently respect them (1,2005:10)
Tourism is, in terms of the growth rate, the third fastest-growing field on the
economic market with culture being the fourth. When these two get together, the result
is cultural tourism. However, the terms cultural tourism and heritage tourism are not
clearly defined. Hall and Zeppel (1990a: 87) realized the connection between cultural
and heritage tourism, stating that the cultural tourism is based on performing arts,
visual arts and festivals while the heritage tourism is focused on visiting landscapes,
historic sites, monuments and buildings. Some other scholars made a clear distinction
between these two terms. Moscardo (2000), for example, argued that the heritage
tourism was focusing on the past, and cultural tourism on the pesent. Prentice (2004)
108

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

said that heritage tourism was one of the fastest growing forms of cultural tourism
(5,2003:5)
Libraries, as cultural institutions, are an important factor behind the development
and improvement of cultural tourism. By digitalizing their book holdings, libraries have
become an important factor behind the social progress based on knowledge managed
by digital technology. In such a way, they enable a direct online access to library
material, studying accessories and other information that take an active part in the
presenting a specific region to tourists.
The role of libraries in the development of cultural tourism has rapidly increased in
the last several years, because tourists more and more gather a lot of information on a
destination before deciding to visit it. There are numerous ways for libraries to attract
tourists. An example may be an organization of tourist visits providing them to get to
know with cultural and historical heritage of a region, the history and structure of the
library itself, its book holdings and its services. If libraries organize exhibitions, they
should be part of the tourists’ visit. Before the very visit tourists can be provided with a
short video presentation as an introduction to the things they are about to see. Visits
should be organized on several occasions during the day and adapted to different types
of visitors. The programs of the visit should involve both adults and children and they
should be made according to the type of visitors.
In terms of the development of cultural tourism, not only technical equipment and
capabilities of the library but also the library staff, play an important role, primarily
librarians. Educated and experienced staff is a library’s the main asset. In order to
provide high quality service both managers of the institution and the employees should
be highly skilled. A librarian should be well-educated and well-informed.
An excellent command of several foreign languages is a necessary prerequisite for
getting the work done successfully. As a combination of digital technology and the
proficiency of the librarian resulted in the appearance of the service “Ask a librarian”
in many countries all over the world. Libraries form networks and closely cooperate in
order to provide a service. A user can write the information he/she needs and ask
questions on the question page which are, then, forwarded to the department of one of
the libraries that are part of the system in the form of an e-mail (figure 1).
A user is given a reply, also, in the form of an e-mail. The aim of this service is to
make information available all the time, which is best achieved when libraries from
different time zones are included in the system. Therefore, if a local library is closed,
another one may provide a reply.

109

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

Figure 1: „Ask a librarian“ question page

Source: http://www.loc.gov/rr/askalib/ask-business2.html

BIBLIOTHECA ALEXANDRINA AS THE FACTOR OF CULTURAL
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT
The Royal Library of Alexandria was the largest library in the ancient world.
It is generally thought to have been founded at the beginning of the 3rd century BC,
during the reign of Ptolemies dynasty of Egypt. Initially the Library was closely linked
to a "museum," or research institution. Libraries were very important for textual
research in the ancient world, since the same text often existed in several different
versions of varying quality. The Library's collection was very famous in the ancient
world. It was made of papyrus scrolls. It is impossible, however, to determine how
large the collection was. According to some sources, the library had 700.000 scrolls.
The original library was located in the royal district of the city, with an additional
building for storage on the harbor, and a "daughter library" located in the Serapeum in
the southwest part of the city. The library was open to scholars from all cultures and
both girls and boys. It is not clear exactly when the ancient Library of Alexandria was
destroyed. It was probably damaged by fire during Caesar's conquest in 48 BC. In 391
AD, the bishop of Alexandria burned the Serapeum to the ground, which finally put the
institution of the library to an end.
In 1974, the University of Alexandria began a campaign for the rebuilding of the
ancient library. In 1988, the president of Egypt, Mubarak, took up the project at a
national level and the Egyptian government organized an international competition.
The Norwegian company Snohetta won the competition in 1989. The New Library of
Alexandria was opened in October 2002.
Today, Bibliotheca Alexandrina is a very important cultural and educational center.
It contains:
• a library that can hold millions of books;
• a center for the Internet and its archive;
110

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

• six specialized libraries for: audio-visual materials, the visually impaired,
children, the young, microforms, rare books and special collection;
• three museums for: antiquities, manuscripts, the history of science;
• Planetarium;
• children’s research center (ALEXploratorium);
• two permanent exhibitions;
• six art galleries for temporary exhibitions;
• a conference center for thousands of persons;
• seven research institutes.
Most of users are students from the University of Alexandria and local schools.
Various conferences held in the complex have received regional and international
attention, raising the profile of the whole city. Bibliotheca Alexandrina also organizes a
number of cultural, scientific, educational, regional and international activities and
events. The library has also influenced infrastructural improvements of the city, such as
renovating roads, building bridges and upgrading hotels. The library is seen as a
progressive landmark for the country as a whole.
The Bibliotheca Alexandrina joined the World Library Union which consists of 30
libraries from all over the world including the Congress Library in Washington. The
Library of Alexandria was established as the first digital library following modern
technological systems to spread knowledge. It participates with US Congress library in
the project "World Digital Library". The aim of this project is digitalization of unique
materials including: maps, manuscripts, books, music, audio records, films, engineering
designs and photographs from all over the world. The project includes international
partners: UNESCO, IFLA and many libraries in Asia, Africa and North and South
America.
Another project is called “One million books”. The aim of this project is
digitalization of one million books during 3 years. The Bibliotheca Alexandrina works
in cooperation with China, India and USA. The International institute for Information
Studies (ISIS) plays a central role in implementing developments in these projects.
With all its potentials, the Library of Alexandria is a very important factor in the
development of cultural tourism. The new edition of Alexandria tourist guidebook
gives a complete file about the Bibliotheca Alexandrina in order to inform the tourists
about its developmental and cultural role as well as its possessions and various
capabilities. Alexandria tourist guidebook is issued in three languages: Arabic, English
and French.
The library pays special attention to tourist visits. The Visits Department consists of
tourist guides who have received intensive training to lead an entertaining and an
enlightening tour for the visitors. The Tours Guide Desk is located in the foyer of the
Library of Alexandria. Tours with professional tourist guides are organized every day
in five languages: Arabic, English, French, Italian, and Spanish. During the tour,
visitors are introduced to the historical background of the Ancient Library, the efforts
made to build the new one, its organization and significance as well as other
information about the different sections of the Library of Alexandria. The receptionists
are responsible for prior reservation for individuals and groups.
The Library organizes three types of visits:
1. School visits are organized every day and reservations should be made at least
5 days in advance;
111

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

2. Public Tours are organized in Arabic, English, French, Italian and Spanish. The
duration of the tour is about 30-45 minutes. Reservations should be made 2 days
in advance.
3. Special Tours are offered daily except Fridays and Saturdays, in Arabic, English
and French. The duration of the tour is about one hour and 15 minutes. This
category of tours includes a more elaborate description of the Library facilities.
There are several rules established by the Library:
1. Neither the external tour guides nor the tour leaders of the travel agencies are
allowed to explain inside the library, since the Library has its own guides who
speak different languages.
2. Ages 6 – 16 years are not permitted inside the Library's Main Reading Hall
unless they join guided tours.
3. Children under 6 years are not allowed in the Library, except for the Antiquities
Museum, the Book Shop, and Day Care.
4. Photographs are allowed within the Library except the exhibitions (Impressions
of Alexandria and the World of Shady Abd El Salam).
Due to many complaints from the visitors for not allowing children under 6 years
old to accompany their parents in the Library, the Visits Department has provided Day
Care to host the visitors’ children with the presence of their parents. It is offered daily
from 11am to 4pm except Fridays and Saturdays.
Bibliotheca Alexandrina organizes two types of special presentations:
1. The Culturama;
2. Children presentations.
Culturama is a cultural panoramic show portraying the history of Egypt with
highlights and examples of Ancient Egyptian and Coptic/Muslim heritage. It was
developed by CULTNAT (Center for Documentation of Cultural and National
Heritage) and considered the first ever patented 9-projector interactive system. The
presentation lasts 15-20 minutes and it is displayed on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday in three languages: English, French and Arabic. Prior
reservation for Culturama is obligatory for school visits and groups. The reservation
should be made at least 5 days in advance.
Children presentations are designed for children ages 4-9 in order to explain and
describe the history of the Ancient Library of Alexandria, and the building of the New
Library in a simplified manner using animation. The presentation lasts approximately
45 minutes including the tour of the Library building. These presentations are offered
every day except Fridays and Saturdays and prior reservation is obligatory.
The Visits Department has a very important task - assessing the needs of their
visitors both within Alexandria’s Library and the city at large. At the entrance of the
library there is Alexandria Monuments Plasma Screen which gives tourists an overview
of the archeological sites in Alexandria. Bibliotheca Alexandrina, also, assists tourists
in enjoying their trip to the city of Alexandria by preparing a guidebook about the city,
including information about archeological sites, hotels, cultural centers, consulates,
shopping malls and other information.
The Visits Department has been working hard towards increasing the number of
tourists by implementing an effective marketing strategy. Once a week the Department
sends a representative to the various target groups, like schools, universities, social and
sports clubs, hotels, professional associations and travel agencies to explain the
facilities and services at the library, and encourage them to plan visits to the
112

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

Bibliotheca Alexandrina. In order to improve the overall quality of service offered, the
Visits Department makes use of the suggestions and comments of its visitors. All
suggestions from the public are acknowledged either by telephone, e-mail or regular
post. Once a year, the Visits Department creates statistical reviews of library visits and
compare obtained results with those of previous years.
Figure 2: Total number of visitors in 2004/2005 and 2003/2004

Source: „Annual report July 2004-June 2005“

The Antiquities Museum has got a very important role in stimulating public
awareness about history and culture. It introduces programs on Egypt’s heritage
through media and electronic publications and promotes the historic role of Alexandria
through its production of booklets, flyers and postcards.
The integral parts of Bibliotheca Alexandrina Administration Department are
Travel Unit and Transportation Unit. The Travel Unit is responsible for the travel and
accommodation arrangements for both Bibliotheca Alexandrina staff and guests,
nationally and internationally. From July 2004. till June 2005. this unit attended to
2,254 different requests. The Transportation Unit is responsible for the transportation
arrangements for both Bibliotheca Alexandrina staff and guests, within Egypt. It is
equipped with: three vans, four 15-seater buses, two 28-seater buses (donated by
Chrysler), seven cars, one book mobile car, two small motorcycles.
Realizing the importance of web technology and the role of Internet, Bibliotheca
Alexandrina formed the Website Unit which closely monitors and manages the content
and overall look of the website. It presents information about the Bibliotheca
Alexandrina, its services, activities and news as well as other useful information for
tourists visiting Egypt and Alexandria. All these information are available in three
languages: Arabic, English and French.
113

UTMS Journal of Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 107-114, 2010
V. Tosic, S. Lazarevic: THE ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CULTURAL...

CONCLUSION
Libraries may be a significant factor in the cultural tourism development of a region.
There is an increasing number of tourists who look up the information on a destination
prior to the trip/journey, chiefly via the Internet. Libraries have a lot of material that
can be presented through web sites. Although has considerably provided the number of
services that libraries can offer to the public, business community and tourist, the role
of the workers is still invaluable. The educated and skilled staff is the key to providing
quality service. In order to introduce all the library services to tourists and the local
community it is important to develop an excellent marketing strategy. It involves a
well-designed and accessible web-presentation, since it can be accessed to from all
over the world: the sending of e-mails to potential users; visiting travel agencies,
educational institutions and companies; active part of the staff in the media; the
printing and distribution of promotional leaflets, brochures as well as other methods.

REFERENCES
Djukic-Dojcinovic V.; Kulturni turizam, Clio, Beograd, 2005.
Jedresic V.; Turizam, u interdisciplinarnoj teoriji i primjeni, Zbornik istrazivanja, Skolska knjiga, Zagreb,
2001.
Simmons, D. G.; Community participation in tourism planning, Tourism Management, 15
Shackley M.; Too much room at the inn, Annals of Toursm Research, 23
Timothy, D., Boyd S.; Heritage tourism, Prentice Hall, Harlow, 2003.
http://www.loc.gov/rr/askalib/ask-business2.html

114

