Pamukkale Üniversitesi

Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi
Pamukkale University Journal of Social Sciences Institute
ISSN1308-2922 EISSN2147-6985
Article Info/Makale Bilgisi
√Received/Geliş:22.02.2020 √Accepted/Kabul:28.04.2020
DOİ: 10.30794/pausbed.692868
Araştırma Makalesi/ Research Article
Efendi, M. (2020). "The Problems Between Bus Drivers and Tourist Guides In Cultural Tours" Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü
Dergisi, sayı 40, Denizli, s. 367-383.

THE PROBLEMS BETWEEN BUS DRIVERS AND TOURIST GUIDES IN CULTURAL TOURS
Mahmut EFENDİ*
Abstract
In this study, it was aimed to reveal the problems experienced by bus drivers and tourist guides during the tours from the
perspectives of bus drivers. In accordance with this purpose, in this study, which was designed in the qualitative research
method, 86 bus drivers in İstanbul, Turkey were initially asked in which places they could experience potential problems with
the tour guides and they responded that these potential places were; inside the bus, museum-archeological site entrances
and exits (parking lots), hotels and restaurants. Finally, bus drivers were asked what problems they experienced with the tour
guides in cultural tours and as a result, such remarkable findings as timing problems, egocentric behaviors of tourist guides
towards bus drivers and interfering with the driving were revealed.
Key Words: Bus Drivers, Tourist Guides, Cultural Tours, Problems.

KÜLTÜREL TURLARDA OTOBÜS ŞOFÖRLERİ VE TURİST REHBERLERİ ARASINDAKİ SORUNLAR
Özet
Bu çalışmada otobüs şoförleri ile turist rehberlerinin tur süresince geçirmiş oldukları zamanda yaşadıkları sorunların, otobüs
şoförünün bakış açısıyla ortaya çıkarılması amaçlanmıştır. Bu amaç doğrultusunda nitel bir araştırma yöntemiyle tamamlanan
bu çalışmada öncelikle İstanbul/Türkiye’de bulunan 86 otobüs şoförlerine turlarda turist rehberi ile yaşanabilecek sorunların
hangi mekânlarda olabileceği sorulmuş; otobüs içerisi, müze-ören yeri giriş ve çıkışları (otoparklar), oteller ve restoranlar
olarak cevap alınmıştır. Son olarak otobüs şoförlerine turist rehberi ile kültür turlarında hangi sorunları yaşadıkları sorulmuş
ve sonuç olarak; zamanlama ile ilgili, turist rehberinin otobüs kaptanına karşı egolu davranışları ve araç kullanımına müdahale
etme gibi dikkat çekici noktalar ortaya çıkmıştır.
Anahtar Kelimeler: Otobüs Şoförleri, Turist Rehberleri, Kültür Turları, Sorunlar.

* Dr., Aydın Adnan Menderes Üniversitesi Turizm Fakültesi, AYDIN.
e-posta: efendimahmut926@gmail.com (orcid.org/0000-0002-7388-5239)

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

1. INTRODUCTION
After the industrial revolution, many factors such as the increase of leisure time and income level and
technological developments have increased the demand for tourism (Aslan &Çokal, 2016: 54). The improvements
and innovations in transportation technology have taken away the travel barrier for people. Together with the
rapid developments in information and communication technologies, geographical boundaries have begun to
disappear and the concept of being a world citizen has begun to be discussed (Okul et al., 2017: 187).
Tourism has been started and developed based on transportation systems and the development of tourism
has been revived by transportation tourism. Tourism transportation is a service activity that provides the fast,
safe and regular transportation of tourists from tourism markets to tourism attraction places in the journeys of
touristic purposes. Transportation services in tourism are provided by one of the transportation systems, which
are railways, sea lanes, land routes and airways (Doğaner, 1998: 1).
The number of people participating in touristic journeys for various reasons have been increasing rapidly in
parallel with this development (Olcay et al., 2015: 350). Tourism is one of the most dynamic sectors today with
its constantly developing and changing structure (Er & Bardakoğlu, 2016: 96). The most important capital of
tourism enterprises contributing significantly to the national economy is their employees (Yurcu & Atay, 2015:
17). Despite the rapid growth in the large labor market share of tourism employment and tourism industry,
tourism is characterized by its high employee exchange rates (Kim, 2014, Kosta et al. 2017: 64). Consequently,
it has become even more difficult to cover more and diverse services together with the increase in outsourcing
(Zitkiene & Blusyte, 2015: 81). In this regard, the difficulties experienced by travel agency employees and other
employees working in the tours for the agencies, the working conditions of the tourism industry, and therefore
the dropouts from work can be shown as examples.
One of the major areas of interest in touristic journeys and in the touristic destination of tourists is cultural
tours. Culture is everything that human produces in order to survive with nature against nature (Emekli, 2006: 53).
Scientists who state that culture is a whole composed of material and spiritual values ​that a society possesses also
argue that culture is a whole with all kinds of knowledge, interests, habits, value judgments, general attitudes,
opinions, thoughts and behaviors (Uygur &Baykan, 2007: 33)
Cultural tourism is an important factor in transferring natural, historical and cultural heritage to future
generations, creating and increasing the demand for tourism in the region (Er & Bardakoğlu, 2016: 96). In order
to carry out cultural tourism, first of all, a route must be determined, the tour must be prepared and this tour
must be carried out by means of transportation sector. Accordingly, it is deemed necessary by the literature
reviewed to make the definition of the tour first, and then to mention the staff to be involved in the tour and
to reflect the problems experienced among the staff working in the tour from a different perspective (from the
perspectives of bus drivers).
The aim of this study is to reveal the problems that are experienced between bus drivers and tourist guides
working in cultural tours and working as a locomotive in the tours sometimes as agency employees and sometimes
as outsourced employees from the perspectives of bus drivers. For this purpose, it is an extremely important to
identify the places where problems may arise. Furthermore, the importance of the study is increasing due to
the fact that no previous studies on the conflicts between bus drivers and tourist guides have been found in the
literature review.
2. LITERATURE
2.1.Conflicts in Tourism
The aim of human relations in enterprises is to contribute to the quality, effectiveness, efficiency of the
organization and the job satisfaction of the employees and also to ensure that they work effectively and efficiently
(Aytürk, 2010: 9). The basic principles that should be implemented in human relations in organizational and social
life are to give importance and value to human beings, trust them, be trustworthy and honest, pay attention to
dressing and physical appearance, and words and behaviors, use body language well, communicate positively

368

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

and effectively, and be empathic (Aytürk, 2010: 12). Organizational culture is an important factor that gathers
the employees of the organization around mutual beliefs, values, norms and traditions and that also plays an
active role in adapting the organization itself to the external environment (Rızaoğlu&Ayyıldız, 2008: 7). Besides,
it can be seen as the beginning of communication. Communication is the basic process that ensures the harmony
and interaction of individuals or organizations both with the social system in which they are involved and with
other people and organizations in this system (Bahar, 2012: 160).
Beyond that, communication is an important process in interpersonal relations undertaking an important place
in order to prevent conflicts. Conflicts may arise between individuals who communicate due to such processes as
incomprehension and misunderstanding. The reasons preventing communication can be listed as the problems
stemming from physical environment, psycho-social barriers, status differences, gender differences, cultural and
language differences (Mısırlı, 2013: 23).
Etymologically, the term “conflict” comes from the Latin root “combat or war” and is defined as the
confrontation between two or more enemies or societies that are improperly located (Çakmak& Isaac, 2016:
291). According to Galtung’s theory of conflict (1996: 291, Çakmak & Isaac, 2016: 291), there must be three
elements for the conflict to arise as contradiction, attitude and behavior. Contradiction refers to the primary
conflict situation in which the real and/or perceived aims of the two parties are incompatible. This contradiction
causes the parties to perceive each other negatively and processes some attitudes towards both parties. The
third element, (hostile) behavior takes the form of threats, repression and violent attacks.
The concept of conflict is a concept used to explain the uneasiness, tensions, indecisiveness, open or hidden
resistance, the factors that cause them and the attitudes and behaviors of the individuals affected by them
(Barutçugil, 1989: 219; Topaloğlu & Avcı, 2008: 76). The fact that scientists have dealt with the concept of conflict
in different dimensions from different perspectives (Bartunek et al., 1992: 211; Topaloğlu&Avcı, 2008: 76) and
that conflicts emerge in extremely different settings, levels and forms have led to define conflict as a concept in
different ways (Slabbert, 2004: 83).
According to Koçel (2018: 664), conflict refers to the situation of disagreement between two or more people
or groups stemming from various reasons. Eren (2016: 609) defines conflict in as the events stemming from the
problems of individuals or groups working together in an organization and causing the disruption of activities; and
argues that conflict generally disrupts the activities of enterprises. According to Sirivun (2001), conflict is defined
as an interactive process that emerges among social entities as a result of contradictions and disagreements.
While defining conflict, Şimşek (2002: 285) focuses on its causes and defines the concept of conflict as “the
contradiction or disagreement stemming from sharing or allocating scarce resources between two people or
groups in an organization, and again from status, purpose, value or perception differences between these people
or groups. In addition to this, the fact that there is more than one person in the conflict suggests relationship
conflict.
Relationship conflict emerges in the form of infighting within the work setting and discomfort (Jehn, 1995:
258; Jehn & Mannix, 2001: 238); anger and tension (Curseu et al., 2012: 98); psychosomatic complaints, stress
and exhaustion (De Dreu et al., 2002); low level of confidence and high intention to leave (Kiran et al., 2012: 199);
personality differences and feelings of dislike (Martinez-Moreno et al., 2009: 252). Furthermore, considering the
formation of the tour and touristic environment, it can be seen that bus drivers and tourist guides share the same
environment. Accordingly, it should be noted that one of the environments in which conflict may be experience
dare the tours.
The destinations that tourists go for vacation also allow them to prefer the guided tours of agencies instead
of visiting the touristic archeological sites on their own. While the guides are the experience engineers who
share rational information during the tours, they become the relational market-based resources that enable the
emotional bond transformation between the agency/country and the tourist (İşler & Güzel, 2014: 128).
The conflicts that can be experienced during tours are tourist-local people conflicts, tourist-official conflicts,
official-local people conflicts and official-official conflicts. In the literature, tourist-local people conflicts have

369

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

generally been mentioned and researches have been conducted accordingly. In addition to this, no researches
have been found in the literature regarding the conflicts that can be experienced between bus drivers and tourist
guides. The fact that the life safety of the tourists and tour guides are entrusted to bus drivers during the tours
reveals the importance of the issue again.
Considering the types of conflicts in tourism enterprises, the following studies are remarkable: Lee (2019)
analyzed the conflict map for ecotourism using the Q method; Wang and Yotsumoto (2019) investigated the
conflicts in rural tourism development; Eşitti (2018) analyzed the effects of job values ​​on the intention of leaving
work in accommodation enterprises; Shen et al. (2017) studied social and cultural conflicts in tourism; Üzümcü
and Akpulat (2017) revealed the relationship between work-life conflict and life satisfaction of the employees
in tourism enterprises; Almeida, Costa and Da Silva (2017) analyzed the conflicts in spatial issues in tourism;
Toprak et al. (2017) revealed the relationship between conflict management methods of managers and the trust
in managers; Çakmak and Isaac (2016) analyzed attracting tourism to the destinations struggling with conflicts;
Kuvanandand Akan (2012) discussed the views of residents and hotel managers on tourism impact and forestrelated tourism in terms of conflict and agreement in stakeholder attitudes; Gürkan and Demiralay (2013) studied
the relationship between relation and task conflict and intention to leave; Kocaman et al. (2012) analyzed the
effects of organizational culture on organizational conflict; Çetin and Kızılırmak (2012) investigated the current
status of licensed guidance services; Haija (2011) revealed the level of the relationship between foreign visitors
and the government and the inhabitants in the region; Topaloğlu (2010) discussed the management process
of organizational conflicts in terms of hotel enterprises; Doğan et al. (2010) studied the relationship between
empathy and anger; Üngüren et al. (2009) aimed to determine the relationship between job satisfaction and
organizational conflict management; Buhalis (2008) studied the conflicts between hotel employees and tour
operators; Topaloğlu and Boylu (2006) the types of conflicts experienced in hotel enterprises; Aksoy and Kaplan
(2005) analyzed the impact degree of the causes of conflict; Asunakutlu and Safran (2004) studied the conflicts
stemming from cultural differences and the management of these conflicts.
2.2.The Staff That Carry Out the Tours
The individuals who can take part in a tour are; the tour leader, tourist guide, group chairman, entertainers,
supervisors, those who do the transfers and bus drivers. The information regarding some of the staff required to
carry out the tour, beginning from the tourist guides, is given below.
Guidance services are given in the country where tourists come as guests (Ahipaşaoğlu, 2009: 48) and these
services are mostly providing the tour for foreign tourist groups and enabling local operators to carry out their
programs (Yarcan & Peköz, 2001: 60). Besides, if there are no tour managers or group leaders, they can assume
the duties of them, too (Çolakoglu & Colakoglu, 2007: 36). Tourist guide is also responsible for the realization of
a package tour that is sold (Hacıoğlu, 2000: 169; Çetin & Kızılırmak, 2012: 308).
Tourist guides are those who lead tourists in the language they choose, translate the cultural and natural
heritage of the region to them and have the equipment that is accepted by the appropriate management of the
region (Köroğlu, 2013: 91). According to the definition of the World Federation of Tourist Guide Associations
(2010), tour leader is the person who guides the visitors in the language they prefer and translates the cultural
and natural heritage of the area (Tsaur & Teng, 2017: 439).
A tourist guide is someone who works in the travel industry and takes tourists to tours within limited time.
Holloway (1981), who carried out the first systematic studies on tourist guidance, emphasized that the task of
leading the tourist group was expressed under plenty of names. There are many tourist guide terms defined by
different researchers such as tour guide, local guide or tour coordinator (Zhang & Chow, 2004: 82; Köroğlu, 2013:
92).
During the trips, tour leaders communicate with tourists and therefore, the performance of tour leaders are
perceived by tourists, which also affects satisfaction, the quality of service and the decision of tourists to buy the
tours again (Chang, 2014; Wang et al., 2002).

370

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Transportation, which is one of the significant physical life institutions of a society, functions just as the veins
in the human body. Transportation sector supports the development of all other sectors and constitutes a driving
force within social, cultural and economic development (Tokat & Kara, 2003: 2).
A driver is defined as the one who drives a motor vehicle on the land route and holds the relevant professional
qualification certificate (Official Gazette, 2018). Bus drivers are the people who use a vehicle designed for
transportation services in the country or abroad to transport people from one location to another. Bus drivers are
among the members involved in package tours. Together with the transportation services, they help to complete
the tour in the best way. Edvardsson (1998) expressed quality and customer complaints in transportation
services as the behaviors of the driver and other employees, punctuality, technical issues regarding the vehicle,
the comfort of the vehicle and the state of the stops (Çatı, 2003: 122).
3. METHOD
This study was prepared in the phenomenology design, which is one of the qualitative research designs. In
phenomenological studies, it is essential to focus on the phenomenon that are known but not embarked upon in
an in-depth and detailed manner (Büyüköztürk et al., 2015: 91; Güler et al., 2013: 41).
Exploratory research is necessary due to the need to study a group or population, identify the variables that
cannot be easily measured, or hear silenced voices (Creswell, 2016: 42). In this regard, the research process
waslaunched in order to letthe bus drivers in the tours speak up. Therefore, the research was completed from
the perspectives of bus drivers. Qualitative researchers organize their studies inductively as more abstract units
of information and create patterns, categories and themes “from the bottom-up” (Creswell, 2016: 45). Coding
method was used in this research. In coding method, touristic places were identified as the primary problem
centers. Then, the spaces were identified and the research was completed under this structure. After that,
the possible problems were discussed. The reason for using this coding was the fact that conflicts could be
experienced in many places and when they were presented under themes, it was necessary to distinguish the
spaces and offer possible solutions for these conflicts to occur in these spaces. Besides, the data obtained in the
research were presented as a whole in a table in the findings section and following this, the explanations were
presented accordingly.
Qualitative research is a type of research in which the researcher examines the subject or event to be
investigated in its natural environment and tries to determine the meanings that the researched individual
constructs in his/her mind about these situations and to interpret them (Denzin& Lincoln, 1998; Yıldırım&Şimşek,
2006). In qualitative research; the time, energy, organization and money required so as to collect the data of the
interviews and observations requires the sample to be limited.
Interview is one of the fundamental data collection tools in qualitative research and is one of the most
frequently used research methods in social sciences (Güler et al., 2013: 113). Interview is a discussion between
two or more people around a particular purpose. Conventionally, interviews can be classified as structured, semistructured, or unstructured interviews. According to Harrel and Bradley (2009), semi-structured interviews have
a general road map but they try to reveal the different dimensions of the subject by asking different questions
within this general framework according to the respondent’s interest and knowledge (Altunışık et al., 2007;
Üzümcü, 2015). During this research, by reaching the Tourism Chauffeurs Occupational Association located in
İstanbul/Turkey, interviews were made with the bus drivers between the dates of 15 April2019 and 15 July 2019
reached by the help of the President of the Association. The demographic information of the bus drivers was
presented in Table 1. In addition to this, by means of the open-ended questionnaire form, the bus drivers were
asked “In which places can there be problems that may be experienced between the bus driver and the tourist
guide during your tours?’’ and the responses obtained were given in Table 2. Finally, the bus drivers were asked
“In your opinion, what are the problems between the tour guide and bus driver during the tours?”, the findings
obtained were presented in Table 3 and presented to the readers. In order to reveal the problems between bus
drivers and tourist guides, the conflict types of Hatch (1997: 305) and Asunakutlu and Safran (2004: 31) were
used.

371

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

3.1.Population and Sample
Qualitative research, known as a concrete and difficult method for collecting data, has become popular in
the recent years (Kosovalı et al., 2010: 398). While determining the sample in qualitative research, the relevance
of the sample to the research subject is taken into consideration more rather than its power of representation.
In this study, useful sampling technique, which is one of the improbable sampling techniques, was used (Berg
& Lune, 2015: 71). In this kind of research, purposeful sampling method is used more (İslamoğlu, 2009: 183). In
this study, convenience sampling, which is one of the purposeful sampling methods, was selected. This sampling
method provides the researcher speed and practicality because in this method, the researcher chooses a situation
that is close and easy to access (Yıldırım & Şimşek, 2006: 113). Accordingly, by contacting the President of the
Tourism Chauffeurs Occupational Association located in İstanbul, he was asked for help in contacting bus drivers
and therefore, the interviews were completed through the association.
The data source of the research was composed of the individuals who experienced the phenomenon
focused by the research and could reflect it. For this reason, the population of the research was composed of
the individuals working actively as bus drivers in the tours. Due to such limitations as time and cost in reaching
the whole population in the research, purposeful sampling method was used in conducting this research. The
interviews with the bus drivers were completed during their free time in the places such as hotels, museumsarcheological sites and restaurants.
Interviews were made with 86 bus drivers reached by the interest of the Tourism Chauffeurs Occupational
Association located in İstanbul and by the help of the President of the Association between the dates of 15 April
2019 and 15 July 2019. First of all, the demographic information of bus drivers was obtained and given in table
1. Besides, in the interviews completed with the open-ended questionnaire form, the bus drivers were asked
the question “In which places can there be problems that may be experienced between the bus driver and the
tourist guide during your tours?’’ and the responses obtained were given in Table 2. Finally, the bus drivers were
asked “In your opinion, what are the problems between the tour guide and bus driver during the tours?” and the
findings obtained were presented in Table 3.
The data of the research was collected by beginning from the demographic information first in the interviews
made. An open-ended questionnaire form was used to collect the data of the research and two questions were
asked. Computer-assisted content analysis was performed in the analysis of the data obtained from responses
given the Turkish questionnaire form by the bus drivers. Content analysis is conducted in the form of encoding
data, finding the themes, arranging the codes and themes, identifying and interpreting the findings (Yıldırım &
Şimşek, 2006). Within the framework of the content analysis, the findings were prioritized via frequency and
percentage analysis and thus, it was aimed to determine the density and importance of the elements (Karadağ,
2010). It is stated that being a volunteer participant and being given more opportunity to speak will increase
credibility (Kozak, 2014). This is one of the methods of ensuring reliability in qualitative research. In this regard,
the interviews made with the participants lasted approximately for 50 minutes and 1 hour. The participants
should be given explicit information about the purpose and method of the research, how the data obtained from
them will be used, how their anonymity will be preserved and especially what is expected from them (Li, 2004).
Therefore, it was emphasized to the participants of the research that their identities and personal information
would be kept confidential and that the information they provided would be used only for scientific purposes.
The researcher’s interpretation is the fact that the researcher constantly monitors and interprets the progress
of the research in addition to external reviews such as expert review. In this way, the researcher can make
inferences on the progress of the research and self, and the functionality of the methods applied (Shenton,
2004).
4. FINDINGS
The demographic characteristics of the bus drivers who participated in the study are as follows.

372

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Table 1. The demographic characteristics of bus drivers
Variables

N

%

Age
30-39
40-49
50 years and above

29
37
20

33.72
43.03
23.25

X
86

X
100

Educational Status
Elementary
High School
Associate
Undergraduate

28
47
4
7

32.56
54.66
4.65
8.13

Marital Status
Married
Single

65
21

75.58
24.42

6
23
16
41

6.98
26.74
18.60
47.68

Gender
Female
Male

Seniority at Work
1-5
6-10
11-15
16 years and above

When Table1 was analyzed, it could be seen that 43.03% of the participants was between 40-49 years old,
while 33.72% was between 30-39 years old and 23.25% was 50 years old and above. All the participants (100%)
were male. Furthermore, 54.66% is high school graduate, while 32.56% is elementary school graduate, 8.13% is
undergraduate education graduate and 4.65% is associate education graduate. Also, 75.58% of the participants
is married and 24.42% is single. 47.68% of the participants have been working for 16 years and above, whereas
26.74% have been working for 6-10 years, 18.60% for 11-15 years and 6.98% for 1-5 years.
In the interviews made, the answer given to the question “In which places can there be problems that may be
experienced between the bus driver and the tourist guide during your tours?’’ are as follows.

373

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Table 2. The places in which the problems can be experienced between bus drivers and tourist guides
Participants

86

Views

Views

Views

Views

During hotel
accommodations (80)

During museum-archeological
site parking lot entrances and
exits (62)

In the restaurants (61)

İnside the buses (58)

As could be understood from Table 2, the places in which the problems could be experienced between bus
drivers and tourist guides were; hotels (80), museum-archeological site parking lot entrances and exits (parking
lots) (62), restaurants (61) and buses (58). The distribution made according to the views of 86 bus drivers was
mentioned in Table 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively.
Table 3. The problems experienced inside the bus.
Views (The problems experienced)

Inside the bus

The problems experienced about timing (punctuality)

3

Due to not paying attention to the time given

2

Due to no sharing the tour program with the bus driver

1

Indifferent behaviors towards the road and customers

2

Due to indifferent behaviors of tourist guides towards the guests in the bus(go get your water
yourself!)

2

Due to not paying any attention to in-bus cleaning

2

Due to not warning guests about in-bus cleaning and complaining to the bus driver about the dirt
inside the bus

2

Due to interfering with the land route

8

Due to interfering with the bus driver about the road (saying that they know the route though they,
in fact, do not)

6

Due to giving wrong directions by tour guides

2

Due to money issues

6

Due to trying to get the tips given to the bus driver

6

Due to disbursing the money given by the service areas for guests
Technical problems in the bus(broken microphone, turn on the air conditioner and wait!)

1

Egocentric behaviors

39

Due to seeing the bus driver as a slave

13

Due to belittling the bus driver

11

Due to trying to deceive the bus driver about work

6

Due to reprimanding the bus driver in front of guests

4

Due to threating the bus driver with cancelling his labor contract

3

Causing the cancellation of the bus driver’s labor contract (unnecessary complaints)

1

Due to blaming the bus driver for the broken microphone

1

Due to interfering the driving

20

Due to interfering with the driving (drive fast!)

16

Due to making pressure as the tourist guide is unable to catch up the tour program

2

Due to interfering with the driver while the bus driver is parking

2

No problem

5

N

86

%

100

374

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

As could be understood from Table 3, the problems experienced inside the bus were;the problems experienced
about timing, indifferent behaviors towards the road and customers, not paying any attention to in bus cleaning,
interfering with the land route, money issues, and technical problems in the bus.
Table 4. The problems experienced in museum-archeological sites
Views (The problems experienced)

In museum-archeological sites

The problems experienced about timing (punctuality)

30

Due to heavy traffic

1

Due to guests being late

3

Due to the bus driver being continuously called in traffic (due to traffic fines,
accordingly)

8

Due to not being at the meeting point before guests (risk for fee)

4

Due to not obeying tachograph time

12

Due to being late as some roads are closed

2

Egocentric behaviors

4

Due to reprimanding the bus driver in front of guests

1

Due to not wanting to walk to parking lots

2

Due to yelling at the bus driver as he cannot remember the parking lot

1

Due to interfering the driving

4

Due to interfering with the parking place during museum-archeological site
entrances and exits

4

Indifferent behaviors towards the road and customers

1

Due to reprimanding the bus driver because of losing group command

1

Technical problems in the bus(broken microphone, turn on the air conditioner
and wait!)

1

Due to ordering the bus driver to turn on the air-conditioner at the parking lots

1

The problems experienced about parking lot fees and places

28

Due to making the bus driver obliged to come to the point where the tourist
guide and the tourists are

12

Due to saying to the bus driver that he should wait at a certain point

8

Due to ordering the bus driver to pick up from the places that are forbidden to
stop

5

Due to telling the bus driver to wait at certain points and saying that they won’t
do anything about fines

3

No problem

18

N

86

%

100

As could be understood from Table 4, the problems experienced in museum-archeological sites were; the
problems experienced about timing, egocentric behaviors, interfering the driving, indifferent behaviors towards
the roads and customers, technical problems in the bus, and the problems experienced about parking lot fees
and places.

375

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Table 5. The problems experienced in hotel accommodations
Views (The problems experienced)

In hotel accommodations

The problems experienced about timing (punctuality)

6

Due to not being punctual in hotel check-outs (wrong meeting time)

4

Due to not directing the guests in hotel check-outs

1

Due to luggage (do it alone and fast, be careful about the luggage!)

1

The problems experienced about parking lot fees and places

2

Due to not being at the certain point ordered by tourist guides in hotel check-ins and
check-outs

1

Due to parking problems stemming from the fact that the hotel is not centrally
located

1

The problems experienced during hotel accommodations (not backing up coworkers)

73

Due to not giving any rooms for the bus driver

45

Due to directing the bus driver to say in another hotel

10

Due to giving the bus driver bad rooms

10

Due to saying the bus driver to stay in the bus at night

5

Due to trying to make the bus driver stay in staff dorm

1

Due to tourist guides letting themselves into their own rooms at hotel arrivals and
not paying any attention to the accommodation of the bus driver

1

Due to making the bus driver share his room with other people

1

No problem

5

N

86

%

100

As could be understood from Table 5, the problems experienced in hotel accommodations were; the problems
experienced about timing, the problems experienced about parking lot fees and places, and the problems
experienced during hotel accommodations.
Table 6. The problems experienced in meal breaks, resting areas
Views (The problems experienced)

In meal breaks, resting areas

The problems experienced about timing (punctuality)

32

Due to not obeying tachograph time

32

Egocentric behaviors

26

Due to not wanting to eat at the same place

12

Due to not inviting the bus driver to the dining table

10

Due to leaving the bus driver alone

3

Due to such words towards the bus driver as “eat wherever or whatever, I don’t
care!”

1

No problem

28

N

86

%

100

As could be understood from Table 6, the problems experienced in meal breaks and resting areas were; the
problems experienced about timing, and egocentric behaviors.

376

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

5. CONCLUSION
As stated in the first section of the research, the interviews were made with the available bus drivers reached
by the help of the President of the Tourism Chauffeurs Occupational Association located in İstanbul/Turkey. First
of all, the demographic characteristics of the bus drivers were collected during the interviews. Following this,
the bus drivers were asked in which places the problems could be experienced between the bus driver and the
tourist guide and it was determined as a result of the interviews that problems could be experienced “inside the
bus, museum-archeological site entrances and exits (parking lots), restaurants, souvenir shops and hotels. In this
regard, the problems were, in fact, found to be experienced in the touristic places used in cultural tours.
As a result of the research, it was determined that the most common problems experienced by the bus drivers
with the tourist guides were “egocentric behaviors” of the tour guides and “interfering the driving” by the tourist
guides. They also stated that they had problems regarding “the tip collected in the bus”. According to Luthans
(1992), conflict disrupts the harmony of the organization, causes employees to exhibit undesired behaviors,
leads the polarization in the perceptions, emotions and behaviors and therefore, needs to be resolved. In this
context, it will be useful for the bus driver and the tourist guide to behave in harmony with each other and in
a warm manner, which will make the tour calmer and less stressful. For this purpose, it will be better for bus
drivers and tour guides to improve their communication skills and have education accordingly. Interpersonal
conflict arises when individuals within the enterprises fall into various idea, emotion and opinion divergences.
The most common interpersonal conflicts arise from the personal conflicts between subordinates-superiors and
staff-command managers. In addition to all these, there are also conflicts arising due to individual differences at
the same organizational level. The disagreements among workers, the divergences of opinion, idea and interest
among managers, chiefs and employees are of the types of interpersonal conflicts (Eren, 1989: 459).
Furthermore, museum-archeological site entrances and exits (parking lots) were also stated as one of the
most common problems experienced between bus drivers and tour guides, the most commonly repeated as
“Due to not obeying tachograph time; Due to the bus driver being continuously called in traffic (due to traffic
fines, accordingly); Due to making the bus driver obliged to come to the point where the tourist guide and the
tourists are; Due to saying to the bus driver that he should wait at a certain point”, respectively. In this regard,
it should be noted that timing (punctuality)is one of the significant points in tours. Time is the key to success in
the service sector. In this context, it is necessary that the travel agency officer who prepares the tour in cultural
tours should make the bus driver stop depending on the tachograph and prepare the tour program without
ignoring the resting time. Moreover, in the study conducted by Karcıoğlu and Alioğulları (2012), it was stated
that the managers must manage the conflicts they experienced, realize that they could reduce the conflict by
taking the opinions of their co-workers and coming to mutual agreements. Therefore, it was understood that the
tourist guide should work in more harmony with the bus driver by making better time adjustment in the museumarcheological site visits during the cultural tours.
It was determined that most of the problems experienced between the bus driver and the tourist guide were
“about the accommodation place”. Porter (1999) stated that a manager’s leadership skills were related to how
(s)he resolved the conflicts when problems were experienced. In this respect, if the tourist guide states that (s)he
is responsible for the tour or if (s)he acts as if (s)he has taken the responsibility, (s)he should resolve the problem
when the bus driver is not given a good room in the hotels or is sent to another place for accommodation, and
thus, indicate the importance of the bus driver.
It was determined that the problems experienced between the bus driver and the tourist guide during lunch
breaks and resting areas were similar to those experienced inside the bus and that the most common problem
was about timing (punctuality); due to not obeying tachograph time, which was followed by egocentric behaviors
of the tour guide.
The most important point to be stated at this point is that the bus driver and the tourist guide are in the same
side, they are co-workers and they have to act with respect and love for each other as they set off for the tour
together. In this regard, it necessary for them to behave calmly and properly instead of egocentric behaviors.

377

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Furthermore, acting respectfully towards each other despite work stress or busy on-the-road hours, may always
add value to each other and enable the work to be completed easily.
It is considered among the bad behavior that the tourist guide leaves the bus driver, his/her co-worker,
alone during the tour arriving at the hotel, or does not react or stays silent to the situation that the bus driver
is not given a room. It is noteworthy to remember that when bus drivers spend the night in a bad room in the
accommodation place or sleep inappropriately, it is probable that they endanger the lives of the guests while
driving during the tours.
All the people in a bus (employees or those on holiday) in cultural tours should be considered as the same
and this should not be forgotten along the way. Likewise, some bus drivers stated that arriving at a resting
place, neither tourist guides nor tourists may ignore them. Accordingly, the importance of respectfully spending
time or eating together with bus drivers in a resting place may also be considered as a significant motivating
behavior. In this respect, after identifying the problems experienced between the bus driver and the tourist
guide, suggestions can be given for future research.
Among the suggestions that can be given for future research, it can be stated that the studies to be conducted
by using participatory observation method with bus drivers and tourist guides may increase the possibility of
achieving various different findings. Furthermore, in this study, the problems experienced between the bus
drivers and tourist guides were aimed to be revealed from the perspectives of the bus drivers. It is obvious that
the studies that will be conducted from the perspectives of the tourist guides will provide a new point of view
for the field and literature.
In addition to all these mentioned above, among future research, there may also be researches that will
reveal the travel agency centered problems from the perspectives of tourist guides and bus drivers and thus, will
touch on a different topic in the literature. Besides, it is thought that comparative research will also be revealed
together with the studies to be conducted with quantitative methods.
Among the suggestions to be given to travel agencies; no matter it is a cultural tour, a package tour or a daily
tour, determining the bus driver and the tour guide in advance and bringing them together and introducing to
each other may enable to resolve some problems before they occur. It is thought that their motivation will be
higher and arguments will be less in the tours with the recommendations to be given to both parties and the
notes to be given at the beginning of the tours (the behaviors to be conducted during the tour) or by calling them
at intervals and indicating to the hotels to be used for accommodation that they are sensitive on these issues. In
addition to all these, the bus driver often feels left alone during the hotel stays and is sometimes made to stay in
a bad room or elsewhere in the hotel apart from the rooms where tourists are staying. In this regard, considering
the importance of the bus driver during the tours, it is also necessary to mention this situation to the hotels
during the reservations.

378

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

REFERENCES
Ahipaşaoğlu, S. (2009). Seyahat işletmeleri yönetimi ve ulaştırma sistemleri. Ankara: Gazi Kitabevi.
Aksoy, A.,& Kaplan, M. (2005). Konaklama işletmelerinde departmanlar arası çatışmanın analizi ve bir uygulama.
Fırat Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 15(1), 133-154.
Almeida, J.,Costa, C., &Da Silva, N.F. (2017). A frame work for conflict analysis in spatial planning for tourism.
Tourism Management Perspectives, 24, 94–106.
Altunışık, R., Coşkun, R., Bayraktaroğlu, S., & Yıldırım, E. (2007). Sosyal bilimlerde araştırma yöntemleri: SPSS
uygulamalı. Sakarya: Sakarya Yayıncılık.
Asanakutlu, T., & Safran B. (2004). Kültürel farklılıklardan kaynaklanan çatışmalara yönelik bir araştırma: Marmaris
turizm sektörü örneği. Dokuz Eylül Üniversitesi Sosyal bilimler Dergisi, 6(1), 26-49.
Aslan, Z., & Çokal, Z. (2016). Profesyonel turist rehberinin kültürel değerlere katkısına ilişkin turist algılamaları.
Journal of Tourism and Gastronomy Studies, 4(1), 53-69.
Avcı, E. & Doğan S. (2018). E-şikâyetler turist rehberleri hakkında ne söylüyor?. Journal of Travel and Hospitality
Management, 15(1), 133-148.
Aytürk, N. (2010). Örgütsel ve yönetsel davranış. Ankara: Detay Yayıncılık.
Bahar, E. (2012). İletişim. Ankara: Detay Yayıncılık.
Bartunek, J. M., Kolb, D. M., & Lewicki, R. J. (1992). Bringing conflict out from behind the scenes: Private, informal,
and nonrational dimensions of conflict in organizations. Hidden conflict in organizations: Uncovering behindthe-scenes disputes. London: Sage Publications Ltd, 209-28.
Barutçugil, İ. S. (1989). Turizm işletmeciliği. İstanbul: Beta Basım.
Beeho, A. J., & Prentice, R. C. (1997). Conceptualizing the experiences of heritage tourists: A case study of New
Lanark World Heritage Village. Tourism management, 18(2), 75-87.
Berg, B. L., & Lune, H. (2015). Sosyal bilimlerde nitel araştırma yöntemleri. In Bulut, Y. & Ercan B. (Trans.),Nitel
Araştırmayı Desenleme. Konya: Eğitim Yayınevi.
Buhalis, D. (2000). Relationships in the distribution channel of tourism: Conflicts between hoteliers and tour
operators in the Mediterranean region. International Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Administration, 1(1),
113-139.
Büyüköztürk, Ş., Kılıç Çakmak, E., Akgün, Ö. E., Karadeniz, Ş., & Demirel, F. (2015). Bilimsel araştırma yöntemleri
(Geliştirilmiş 19. Baskı). Ankara: Pagem Akademi Yayınları.
Caber, M., Ünal, C., Cengizci, A. D., & Güven, A. (2019). Conflict management styles of professional tour guides:
A cluster analysis. Tourism Management Perspectives, 30, 89-97.
Chang, K. C. (2014). Examining the effect of tour guide performance, tourist trust, tourist satisfaction, and flow
experience on tourists’ shopping behavior. AsiaPacific Journal of Tourism Research, 19(2), 219e247.
Costa, C., Bakas, F. E., Breda, Z., Durao, M., Carvalho, I., & Caçador, S. (2017). Gender, flexibility and the’ideal
tourism worker’. Annals of Tourism Research, 64, 64-75.
Creswell, J. W. (2016). Nitel Çalışma Tasarımı. In M. Bütün& S. B. Demir (Trans.),Nitel Araştırma Yöntemleri.
Ankara: Siyasal Kitabevi.
Curşeu, P. L., Boroş, S., & Oerlemans, L. A. (2012). Task and relationship conflict in short-term and long-term
groups: The critical role of emotion regulation. International Journal of Conflict Management, 23(1), 97-107.
Çakmak, E., & Isaac, R. (2016). Drawing tourism to conflict-ridden destinations. Journal of Destination Marketing
& Management, 6(4), 291-293.
Çatı, K. (2003). Ulaşım hizmetlerinde hizmet kalitesi ve bir uygulama. C.Ü. Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 27(1), 121-134.
Çetin, G., & Kızılırmak, İ. (2012). Türk turizminde kokartlı turist rehberlerinin mevcut durumunun analizi.Afyon
Kocatepe Üniversitesi İİBF Dergisi, 14(2), 307-318.
Çolakoglu, O. E., & Çolakoglu, Ü. (2007). Seyahat acentaları yönetimi. Ankara: Detay Yayıncılık.

379

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

De Dreu, C.K.W., Van Dierendonck, D.., Marjolein, De B. (2002). Conflict at Work and Individual Well-being. In
M. Schabracq, J. A. M. Winnubst, & C. L. Cooper (Eds.), The Handbook of Work and Health Psychology (ss.
495–515). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Denzin, N. K. & Lincoln, S. Y. (2008). Strategies of qualitative ınquiry,Handbook of Qualitative Research. Sage.
Doğan, H., Üngüren, E., & Algür, S. (2010). Öfke ve empati ilişkisine yönelik otel zincirinde bir araştırma. Çukurova
Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 19(3), 277-298.
Doğaner, S. (1998). Türkiye ulaşım sistemleri turizm ve çevre ilişkileri. Coğrafya Dergisi, (6), 1-25.
Edvardsson, B. (1998). Service quality improvement. Managing Service Quality: An International Journal, 8(2),
142-149.
Emekli, G. (2006). Coğrafya, kültür ve turizm: Kültürel turizm. Ege Coğrafya Dergisi, 15(1-2), 51-59.
Er, Ö., & Bardakoğlu, Ö. (2016). Kültürel mirasın sürdürülebilir turizm ürünü çeşidi olarak değerlendirilmesi:
Edirne örneği. Dokuz Eylül Üniversitesi İşletme Fakültesi Dergisi, 17(2), 95-111.
Eren, E. (1989).Yönetim psikolojisi (3rd Ed.).İstanbul: İ.Ü. İşletme Fakültesi Yayınları.
Eren, E. (2016). Yönetim ve organizasyon çağdaş ve küresel yaklaşımlar(12th Ed.). İstanbul: Beta Basım Yayım.
Eşitti, B. (2018). Konaklama işletmelerinde iş değerlerinin işten ayrılma niyetine etkileri: iş-aile-iş çatışmasının
aracı rolü. Verimlilik Dergisi, 3, 235-257.
Galtung, J. (1996). Peace by peaceful means. London: Sage.
Guler, M. V., Lazo, D. G., Pazos, P. J., Borel, C. M., Ottone, E. G., Tyson, R. V., ... & Aguirre-Urreta, M. B. (2013).
Palynofacies analysis and palynology of the Agua de la Mula Member (Agrio Formation) in a sequence
stratigraphy framework, Lower Cretaceous, Neuquén Basin, Argentina. Cretaceous research, 41, 65-81.
Gürkan, G. Ç., & Demiralay, T. (2013). İlişki ve Görev Çatışması ile İşten Ayrılma Niyeti İlişkisinin Araştırılması:
Konaklama İşletmeleri Çalışanları Üzerinde Bir Araştırma. Journal of Social Sciences Eskisehir Osmangazi
University/Eskisehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 14(2).
Güzel, Ö., Türker, A., & Şahin, İ. (2014). Profesyonel turist rehberlerinin algıladıkları mesleki engelleri belirlemeye
yönelik bir araştırma. Gazi Üniversitesi Turizm Fakültesi Dergisi, 2(2), 179-180.
Hacıoğlu, N. (2000). Seyahat acentacılığı ve tur operatörlüğü. Bursa: VİPAŞ AŞ Uludağ Üniversitesi Güçlendirme
Vakfı.
Haija, A. A. (2011). Jordan: Tourism and conflict with local communities. Habitat International, 35(1), 93-100.
Harrell, M. C., & Bradley, M. A. (2009). Data collection methods. Semi-structured interviews and focus groups.
Rand National Defense Research Inst santa monica ca.
Hatch, M.J. (1997). Organization theory.New York:.Oxford University Press.
İslamoğlu, H. (2009). Sosyal bilimlerde araştırma yöntemleri. İzmit. Beta Yayınları.
Ismail, K. M., Richard, O. C., & Taylor, E. C. (2012). Relationship conflict in supervisor-subordinate dyads: a
subordinate perspective. International Journal of Conflict Management, 23(2), 192-218.
İşler, B. D., & Güzel, Ö. (2014). Tur yönetiminde profesyonel turist rehberlerinin deneyimsel rolü: alman turistlerin
kültür turu satın alma davranışına yönelik bir değerlendirme. Süleyman Demirel Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari
Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, 19(1), 125-138.
Jehn, K. A. (1995). A multimethod examination of the benefits and detriments of intragroup conflict. Administrative
science quarterly, 256-282.
Jehn, K. A., & Mannix, E. A. (2001). The dynamic nature of conflict: A longitudinal study of intragroup conflict and
group performance. Academy of management journal, 44(2), 238-251.
Karadağ, E. (2010). Eğitim bilimleri doktora tezlerinde kullanılan araştırma modelleri: Nitelik düzeyleri ve analitik
hata tipleri. Kuram ve Uygulamada Eğitim Yönetimi, 1(1), 49-71.
Karcıoğlu, F., & Alioğulları, Z. (2012). Çatışmanın nedenleri ve çatışma yönetim tarzları ilişkisi. Atatürk Üniversitesi
İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Dergisi, 26(3-4), 215-237.

380

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Kim, N. (2014). Employee turnover intention among newcomers in travel industry. International Journal of
Tourism Research, 16(1), 56–64.
Kocaman, S. (2012). Konaklama işletmelerinde örgüt kültürünün örgütsel çatışma üzerine etkileri: Alanya
bölgesinde bir araştırma. Muğla Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, (28), 167-183.
Koçel, T. (2018). İşletme yöneticiliği. İstanbul: Beta Basım.
Kosovali, E., Pirnar, I., Yagci, K., & Miral, C. (2010). Importance of Employee Perceptions on Service Quality
Improvement and Customer Satisfaction. In 6th International Conference on Business, Management and
Economics, Altinyunus Convention Center, Cesme, Izmir, Turkey.
Kozak, M. (2014). Bilimsel Araştırma: Tasarım, Yazım ve Yayım Teknikleri. Ankara: Detay Yayıncılık.
Köroğlu, Ö. (2013). Turist rehberlerinin iş yaşamındaki rolleri üzerine kavramsal bir değerlendirme. Pamukkale
Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, (16), 91-112.
Kuvan, Y., & Akan, P. (2012). Conflict and agreement in stakeholder attitudes: Residents’ and hotel managers’
views of tourism impacts and forest-related tourism development. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 20(4),
571-584.
Lee, J. H. (2019). Conflict mapping toward ecotourism facility foundation using spatial Q methodology. Tourism
Management, 72, 69-77.
Li, D. (2004). Trustworthiness of think-aoud protocols in the study of translation process. International Journal of
Applied Linguistics, 14(3), 301- 313.
Luthans, F. (1992). Organizational behaviour (7th Ed.).The USA: McGraw-Hill.
Martínez-Moreno, E., González-Navarro, P., Zornoza, A., & Ripoll, P. (2009). Relationship, task and process
conflicts on team performance: The moderating role of communication media. International Journal of
Conflict Management, 20(3), 251-268.
Mısırlı, İ. (2013). Genel ve teknik iletişim. Ankara: Detay Yayıncılık.
Official Gazette. (2018, Ocak 8). tarihinde Karayolu Taşıma Yönetmeliği. Retrieved from www.resmigazete.gov.
tr on 09 April 2018.
Okul, T., Hafçı, B., & Çivici Öncüer, E. (2017). Yabancı dil öğrenme kaygısı: Adnan Menderes Üniversitesi Turizm
Fakültesi öğrencileri üzerine bir uygulama. Mesleki Bilimler Dergisi,6(2), 186-194.
Olcay, A., Bozgeyik, Y., Akköz, H., & Sürme, M. (2015). Profesyonel turist rehberlerinin performanslarının yerli
turistler tarafından değerlendirilmesi. İşletme Araştırmaları Dergisi, 7(2), 349-374.
Porter, M. V. (1999). Leading Through Conflict, Competition and Change.Association Management, 51, 32-39.
Raggatt, P. T., & Morrissey, S. A. (1997). A field study of stress and fatigue in long-distance bus drivers. Behavioral
medicine, 23(3), 122-129.
Rizaoğlu, B., & Ayyildiz, T. (2008). Konaklama işletmelerinde örgüt kültürü ve iş tatmini: Didim örneği. Anatolia:
Turizm Araştırmaları Dergisi, 19(1), 7-20.
Shen, H., Li, X., Luo, J. M., & Chau, K. Y. (2017). One country, two strata: Implications of social and cultural conflicts
of Chinese outbound tourism to Hong Kong. Journal of destination marketing & management, 6(3), 166-169.
Shenton, A. K. (2004). Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research projects.Education for
Information, 22, 63-75.
Sirivun, U. (2001). An Investigation of the primary and secondary conflict management style preferences of men
and women in the role of local managers (Unpublished Document). International Managers and College
Students in Thailand, Nova Southeastern University.
Slabbert, A. (2004). Conflict management styles in traditional organisations. The Social Science Journal, 41(1),
83-92.
Şimşek, Ş. (2002). Yönetim ve organizasyon (7th Ed.). Konya: Günay Ofset.
Tapur, T. (2009). Konya ilinde kültür ve inanç turizmi.Uluslararası Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi, 2(9), 473-492.

381

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Tokat, B., & Kara, H. (2003). Trafik kazalarının azaltılmasında yetiştirilmiş insan kaynaklarının rölü: Dumlupınar
Üniversitesi Karayolu Taşımacılığı Hizmetleri Bölümü örneği. Dumlupınar Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi,
8, 1-13.
Topaloğlu, C. (2010). Örgütiçi çatışmaların yönetim süreci: otel işletmeleri açısından kuramsal bir
değerlendirme. Sosyal Ekonomik Araştırmalar Dergisi, 10(20), 97-114.
Topaloğlu, C., & Avcı, U. (2008). Çatışma, nedenleri ve yönetimi: Otel işletmelerinde yönetici bakış açısıyla bir
inceleme. Süleyman Demirel Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, 13(2), 75-92.
Topaloğlu, C., & Boylu, Y. (2006). Örgütiçi çatışmaların türleri: otel işletmeleri açısından ayrıntılı bir inceleme. Muğla
Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 16, 1-27.
Toprak, L. S., Şentürk, F. K., & Kılıç, G. (2017). Çatışma yönetme yöntemleri ile yöneticiye duyulan güven arasındaki
ilişki: Afyonkarahisar’daki beş yıldızlı otel işletmelerinde bir araştırma. İşletme Bilimi Dergisi, 5(2), 105-133.
Tsaur, S. H., & Teng, H. Y. (2017). Exploring tour guiding styles: The perspective of tour leader roles. Tourism
Management, 59, 438-448.
Uygur, S. M., & Baykan, E. (2007). Kültür turizmi ve turizmin kültürel varlıklar üzerindeki etkileri. Ticaret ve Turizm
Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi,2, 30-49.
Üngüren, E., Cengiz, F., & Algür, S. (2009). İş tatmini ve örgütsel çatışma yönetimi arasındaki ilişkinin belirlenmesi:
Konaklama işletmeleri üzerinde bir araştırma. Electronic Journal of Social Sciences, 8(27), 36-56.
Üzümcü, T. P. (2015). Otel yöneticilerinin turizm eğitimine yönelik algıları: Kocaeli ili otel yöneticileri üzerinde bir
araştırma. Kocaeli Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 30, 123-150.
Üzümcü, P. T. ve Akpulat, A. N. (2017). Turizm işletmeleri çalışanlarının iş-aile yaşam çatışması ve yaşam doyumları
ilişkisi: Kartepe-Çeşme örneği. Uluslararası Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi, 10(51), 1070-1082.
Wang, K. C., Hsieh, A. T., & Chen, W. Y. (2002). Is the tour leader an effective endorser for group package tour
brochures?. Tourism Management, 23(5), 489-498.
Wang, L., & Yotsumoto, Y. (2019). Conflict in tourism development in rural China. Tourism Management, 70,
188-200.
Wong, J. Y., & Lee, W. H. (2012). Leadership through service: An exploratory study of the leadership styles of tour
leaders. Tourism Management, 33(5), 1112-1121.
Yarcan, Ş. (2007). Profesyonel turist rehberliğinde mesleki etik üzerine kavramsal bir değerlendirme. Anatolia:
Turizm Araştırmaları Dergisi, 18(1), 33-44.
Yıldırım, A., &Şimşek, H. (2006). Sosyal bilimlerde nitel araştırma yöntemleri (5th Ed.). Ankara: Seçkin Yayınevi
Yurcu, G., & Atay, H. (2015). Çalışanların öznel iyi oluşunu etkileyen demografik faktörlerin incelenmesİ: Antalya
ili konaklama işletmeleri örneği. Manas Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi, 4(2), 17-34.
Zhang, H. Q., & Chow, I. (2004). Application of importance-performance model in tour guides’ performance:
evidence from mainland Chinese outbound visitors in Hong Kong. Tourism management, 25(1), 81-91.
Zitkiene, R., & Blusyte, U. (2015). The management model for human-resource outsourcing among service
companies. Intellectual Economics, 9(1), 80–89.

382

Pamukkale Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, Sayı 40, Temmuz 2020

M.Efendi

Beyan ve Açıklamalar (Disclosure Statements)
1. Bu çalışmanın yazarları, araştırma ve yayın etiği ilkelerine uyduklarını kabul etmektedirler (The authors of this
article confirm that their work complies with the principles of research and publication ethics).
2. Yazarlar tarafından herhangi bir çıkar çatışması beyan edilmemiştir (No potential conflict of interest was
reported by the authors).
3. Bu çalışma, intihal tarama programı kullanılarak intihal taramasından geçirilmiştir (This article was screened
for potential plagiarism using a plagiarism screening program).

383

