See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225458535

Tourists‘ and Locals‘ Preferences Toward Ecotourism Development in the
Maya Biosphere Reserve, Guatemala
Article in Environment Development and Sustainability · September 2005
DOI: 10.1007/s10668-004-2944-3

CITATIONS

READS

81

815

2 authors, including:
Robert R. Hearne
North Dakota State University
49 PUBLICATIONS 1,597 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Water Policy in Chile View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Robert R. Hearne on 29 April 2015.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Environment, Development and Sustainability (2005) 7: 303–318
DOI 10.1007/s10668-004-2944-3

 Springer 2005

TOURISTS’ AND LOCALS’ PREFERENCES TOWARD
ECOTOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN THE MAYA BIOSPHERE
RESERVE, GUATEMALA
ROBERT R. HEARNE1,* and C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS2
1

Department of Agribusiness and Applied Economics, North Dakota State University,
Bob 5636, Fargo, ND 58105, USA; 2Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza
(CATIE) Managua, Nicaragua
(*author for correspondence, e-mail: rhearne@ndsuext.nodak.edu; fax: +1-701-231-7400;
tel: +1-701-231-6494)
(Received 28 October 2003; accepted 27 May 2004)

Abstract. Ecotourism has been identiﬁed as a low impact means to provide income generating opportunities that are complementary to nature conservation as well as the welfare of the local population. The
Maya Biosphere Reserve in Peten, Guatemala is one of Central America’s largest and most isolated protected areas. And although the area is contains a well-visited archeological site, it has not been developed for ecotourism. In this study choice experiments are used to analyze the preferences toward
alternative scenarios of ecotourism of two important stakeholder groups: foreign tourists and educated
local residents. Results demonstrate that these two populations of have unequal but similar preference
orderings, especially toward: improved national park management and the presence of guides for wildlife
viewing. These stakeholder groups had diﬀerent opinions toward paved access roads and the presence of
illegal colonists within the protected area. Both populations favored an entrance fee toward the absence
of an entrance fee. These preferences were generally consistent across other socioeconomic indicators.
Key words: ecotourism, choice experiments, choice modelling, Maya Biosphere Reserve, Guatemala,
protected area management, Tikal, national parks.

1. Introduction
Ecotourism is considered to be a low impact means to provide income generating
opportunities that are complementary to nature conservation as well as the welfare
of the local population. Ecotourism supports nature conservation by providing an
economic demand for natural ecosystems. Entrance fees and tourist expenditures
provide ﬁnancial incentives to national park managers and communities so that
they maintain secure, accessible, and pristine visitation opportunities. Ecotourism
facilitates rural development by diversifying income generation and complements
other low-impact production and extraction activities. Ecotourism provides alternative recreation activities and thus complements beach and cultural tourism, as
well as reduces the environmental impact of visitors on congested destinations.
Readers should send their comments on this paper to: BhaskarNath@aol.com within 3 months of publication of this issue.

304

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

Many national parks and natural areas are conveniently situated near population centers and tourist centers and can easily attract visitors and expenditures.
However other natural areas, especially remote areas that are rich in biodiversity,
have not been developed for tourism and do not receive tourist expenditures. This
constrains the income generation opportunities of the local population and
reduces their incentive to support nature conservation. Thus, tourism opportunities need to be developed that: (i) attract tourists and tourist expenditures to
otherwise unvisited natural areas, especially those under threat from competing
economic activities; (ii) complement nature conservation; and (iii) support the
income generation and development needs of the local population.
Tourist opportunities that meet the needs of natural area managers, tourists, and
locals, need to be based on the preferences of the tourists and locals as well as the
physical characteristics of the area. Eﬀorts need to be made to understand tourist
demand as well as the capacity of locals to supply services and share their communities
with visitors. This is especially important in areas with historic civil conﬂict and areas
where tourists and residents represent distinct social and cultural groups. Research on
the analysis of tourists’ and locals’ preferences towards the development of natural
areas and tourism services should support the decision making processes of protected
area managers, government agencies, and entrepreneurs at the national and local levels. Also, new methodologies to analyze these preferences need to be developed and
adopted to the needs of protected area managers and decision-makers.
This paper presents an analysis of tourist and local preferences towards nature
based tourism development in the Maya Biosphere Reserve in Peten, Guatemala.
The Maya Biosphere Reserve, in Guatemala, is one of Central America’s largest
and most isolated protected areas. Because of the presence of an extensive tropical
rainforest and because of the popularity of the Mayan ruins at Tikal, the Reserve
has a substantial tourist potential. However, outside of Tikal, the Reserve has not
been developed suﬃciently to exploit ecotourism. Entrance fees are not collected,
access is not supervised, and basic tourist services, such as lodging and guides, are
not provided at the Reserve. Given that the analysis will feature environmental
and ecotourism services that have not as yet been oﬀered, a stated preference analysis will be used to assess willingness-to-pay for hypothetical products.
Choice experiments (sometimes referred to as choice modelling or contingent choice)
is a generalized version of the popular dichotomous choice contingent valuation method
(CVM) of valuation of environmental goods and services. As in CVM, survey respondents are asked to declare their preferences in a hypothetical contingent market. However, choice experiments present respondents with a broad menu of options of which
price/payment is only a single attribute. For this reason authors have suggested that
choice experiments have advantages over CVM, especially in the analysis of substitution
and tradeoﬀs (Boxall et al., 1996; Adamowicz et al., 1998). Also, because price is only
one of many attributes that have inﬂuence over choices, the impact of yea-saying should
be less signiﬁcant in choice experiments than in CVM (Hanley et al., 1998).
Many of the ﬁrst published choice experiments studies in the environmental
economics literature concerned with protected area management. Some of these

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

305

surveyed resource users, such as Canadian hunters (Boxall et al., 1996). While
other studies focused on the preferences of a broader set of citizens, principally
urban residents in Canada, Austrailia, and in Great Britain (Adamowicz et al.,
1998; Hanley et al., 1998; Morrison et al., 1999; Blamey et al., 2000). And Lindberg et al. (1999) analyzed residents preferences towards tourism impacts in Denmark. In Central America, Hearne and Salinas (2002) surveyed tourists to analyze
attributes of national park management in Costa Rica. Both Costa Rican and foreign tourists preferred improved infrastructure, information, observation towers,
and picnic areas. And DeShazo and Fermo (2002) assessed choice set complexity
with assorted subsets of up to nine attributes. They estimated the preferences of
recreationists in Guatemala and Costa Rica toward tourism development. Respondents demonstrated preferences towards access roads, trails, guides, and wildlife
viewing, and the authors concluded that diﬃculties with complex choice sets can
be mitigated in the design and estimation stages.
In this analysis the hypothetical goods and services oﬀered to survey respondents are ecotourism services and attributes of protected area management. Nearly
identical surveys were presented to two distinct populations: (i) foreign tourists
and (ii) educated residents. Thus this analysis can be used to compare and contrast the preferences of both these populations. The results demonstrate a near
homogeneity in preferences between the two populations.
The second section of this paper presents an overview of the problem of ecotourism development in the Maya Biosphere Reserve in Peten, Guatemala. The
third section of the paper describes the methodology used in this analysis. The
fourth section of the paper presents the results of the multinomial logit estimation
of the data. The paper concludes with a discussion of the policy implications of
the study as well as observations about the applicability of this type of analysis in
other protected areas.
2. The study area
The Maya Biosphere Reserve (MBR) in northern Peten Guatemala covers over
1.6 million ha of lowland, humid tropical forest. It is the largest protected area
contained in one country in Central America. Together with the adjacent Calakmul and Montes Azules Biosphere Reserves in Mexico and the Rio Bravo Natural
Reserve in Belize, over 4 million ha of forest cover are protected (see Figure 1,
source Herrera-MacBryde and Villa-Lobos). Because of its relative isolation and
its size, the MBR is rich in biodiversity with a variety of ﬂora, fauna, and endemic species unique to the region. Nearly 130 threatened animal species occur in
the MBR.
The MBR was established in 1990 under the authority of The National Council
of Protected Areas (CONAP). Its creation was a policy response to concerns
about increasing deforestation in Petén (Shriar, 2002). As a Biosphere Reserve follows a model of sustainable regional development which includes integrated rural
development projects (Kuhn, 2000). Since 1990 international development agencies

306

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

Figure 1. The Maya Biosphere Reserve, Peten Guatemala.

and environmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs), such as The United
States Agency for International Development (AID), CARE, The Nature Conservancy, and Conservation International, have supported eﬀorts to manage the area
and preserve its natural resources.
Under the current management plan, the MBR is subdivided into two principle
designated land uses. The core zone of the MBR contains four National Parks
and three protected Biological Reserves. This zone, which contains 50% of the
MBR, is dedicated to nature conservation, archeological preservation, scientiﬁc
research, and tourism. A multiple use zone is dedicated to sustainable land use
practices that complement nature conservation. The core zone of the MBR is supposed to be free of human population. A particular controversy has developed
due to the presence of colonists who have migrated to the Peten and settled illegally in the National Parks and Biological Reserves of the MBR. These colonists
are mostly from the more populous southern areas of Guatemala, and they have
no ancestral or cultural links to the Peten (Sundberg, 1988; Shriar, 2002).

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

307

Despite tourism potential and considerable support from international donors
and NGOs, the infrastructure of the MBR has not been developed to receive
nature-based tourists. Currently 12% of Guatemala’s tourism visits the MBR,
principally to visit Tikal, which is one of the most impressive archeological sites in
Mesoamerica. Most tourists arrive in quick excursions ﬂying from Guatemala to
the airport in Flores, Peten’s principle city, where they are lodged. Visits to other
natural areas and national parks in Peten are rarely included in these excursions.
There are no visitor centers, hotels, guides, or even entrance fees in the MBR outside of Tikal. Recently, ProPeten, a local NGO, has promoted hiking excursions
into the MBR with some lodging in local communities. Lonely Planet and other
tourist guidebooks do mention trekking opportunities for the adventurous
traveler. But most of the information on tourism in Peten focuses on Tikal.
Indeed the lack of the participation of the local population in the development
of Peten as a tourist destination and the nature conservation goals of the MBR
has been a constraint upon the general goals of the MBR as well as other community goals. The MBR was created without any substantive consultation of the
local population. NGOs and MBR managers implement conservation programs
without considering the development plans for the state of Peten. It is noteworthy
that the promotion of ecotourism is among the priorities that CONAP has established in its master plan for the MBR, but income generation of the local population is not. Eﬀorts by NGOs to develop ecotourism attractions are not
coordinated with Guatemala’s Tourism Institute (INGUAT), which is often
expected to provide inputs such as training. Since these tourist initiatives may not
be prioritized by INGUAT as being viable, the resulting inﬁghting can lead to
cynicism among community members (Sundberg, 1988).

3. Methodology
Choice experiments were used to assess preferences for management, conservation,
and development strategies for the MBR. Choice experiments are based on
Lancasterian consumer theory as well as random utility theory. The former proposes that consumers make choices not on the simple marginal rate of substitution
between goods, but based on preferences for attributes of these goods. Random
utility theory states that although consumer utility cannot be known, it can be
decomposed into random and systematic components, such that for all consumers i,
Ui ¼ Vi þ ei

ð1Þ

where Ui is the unobservable, but true utility for alternative i; Vi is systematic component of utility, which can be estimated; and ei is a random component. The systematic component Vi can be expressed as a linear function of explanatory
variables, such that

308

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS
Vi ¼ b 0 Xi ;

ð2Þ

where Xi is a vector of explanatory variables associated with the signiﬁcant attributes of visitor choice (Louviere, 2001). The random component of utility allows
the researcher to make probabilistic statements about tourist and user behavior.
Thus, the probability that the consumer will select alternative i among a set of
alternatives U can be presented as
PðijUÞ ¼ PðUi > Uj Þ ¼ P½ðb0 Xi þ ei Þ > ðb0 Xj þ ej Þ 8 j 2 U;

ð3Þ

where P(.) indicates the probability of an occurrence.
Attributes of MBR management were prioritized and selected based upon the
needs and interests of local decision makers. Formal and informal meetings with
researchers, administrators, tourists, residents, and interested parties in Costa Rica
and Guatemala facilitated this process. An experts’ meeting of economists, foresters, and biologists working for governmental and non-governmental institutions in
the region was held in Peten. Certain attributes proposed by the research team
were validated by the experts’ group. Others were proposed by this group. A series
of four focus groups with tourists was held in Flores. These groups validated the
proposed attributes and levels and also tested the survey instrument.
Local protected area managers and experts stressed the need to assess the degree
of national park management as an important attribute. This group was concerned with public opinion over their level of control of the parks and with their
own needs for administering the MBR. Because of this concern, levels of MBR
administration were selected as alternative speciﬁc constants to identify the three
major policy options, as described in Blamey et al. (2000).
Table I lists the attributes and levels presented in the choice experiment. Each
attribute has a level that is associated with the status quo. Alternative levels
reﬂected options that were considered to be under serious consideration and feasible. Thus, the entrance fees were restricted to either the current condition of no
payment or the alternative payments of $5.00 or $10.00 for foreign tourists and
5.00 quetzals or 10.00 quetzals for Guatemalans.1
The combination of these levels implies a full factorial design of 33 · 23 or 216
possible choice set combinations. This was reduced orthogonally to produce 9
choice set combinations which were combined in 24 choices set groups. Each
choice set group contained three choice sets, with an additional option of ‘No
Preference.’ Choice sets were listed as ‘A,’ ‘B,’ and ‘C’ but with policy labels that
were explained to respondents to correspond with the conservation levels seen as
the goal of MBR managers.
The survey instrument was comprised of three sections. The ﬁrst was designed
to introduce the respondent to the research project and to make them comfortable
with the issues. This section included questions about the respondent’s knowledge
of and attitude towards the conservation eﬀorts of the MBR. The second section

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

309

TABLE I. Attributes and levels presented in the choice experiment.
Attribute

Description

Levels

Description

National Park
Management

All actions aﬃliated
with administration
and control of
protected areas so
that conservation
goals are met.

No management

Status quo, with minimal personnel,
negligible infrastructure, inaccessibility,
and incapacity to control areas, oﬀer
services, or collect fees

Little
management
Adequate
management

Adequate personnel and infrastructure to
control area, but not for public use
Accessible areas with adequate personnel
and infrastructure to meet conservation
goals and to attract and serve tourists

Inexistent

Status quo, due to a lack of information
concerning the few existing services.
Visitors generally stay in Flores or at
Tikal
Cabins in rural communities with local
services
An international standard Ecolodge.
operated by a concessionaire under
conditions appropriate to the region.

Lodging

Hotel and lodging
services available
for tourists, in the
MBR.

Rural cabins
Ecolodge

Wildlife
observation

Availability of
expert guides

Without guides
With guides

Human
settlements

Access roads

Entrance fees

The presence of
communities of
illegal colonists
inside the core
areas of the MBR

Roads that
connect diﬀerent
national parks
within the reserve.
Currently the
road from the
airport in Flores
to Tikal.

Status quo, no assistance of knowledgeable personnel
Knowledgeable personnel to assist in
locating and identifying ﬂora and fauna

With illegal
settlements

Status quo, communities of colonists with
no ancestral link to the regions can
remain inside the core areas of the MBR

Without human
settlements

Colonists relocated by the Government
of Guatemala and given title to other
properties

Unpaved

Status quo, because of lack of pavement
certain areas are inaccessible during part
of the year

Paved

The Government of Guatemala will pave
roads and thus improve access for the
entire year

$0 for
Entrance fees for
Guatemalan
a daily visit to the
and foreign
National Parks.
Guatemalans receive
beneﬁcial rates.
Exchange rate for
2000 Q. 7.50 = $1.00

Status quo, no payment currently
charged

310

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

TABLE I. Continued.
Attribute

Conservation
Levels

Description

These are the policy
labels listed
horizontally to
distinguish choices
A, B, and C

Levels

Description

$5.00 for foreign
Q. 5.00 for
Guatemalan
$10.00 for foreign
Q. 10.00 for
Guatemalan

An intermediate payment level

A relatively high level of payment

A, intermediate

Without ecological services nor
conservation programs

B, satisfactory

Ecological services and conservation
programs with limitations
Optimal levels of conservation and
high visitor satisfaction

C, excellent

of the survey was the choice experiments. Information on each attribute was provided to respondents so that they could make informed decisions. Each respondent was requested to complete three choice sets, with a ‘No Preference’ option.
The third section of the survey included questions about the socioeconomic characteristics of the respondent to use for a generalized analysis.
Surveys were conducted between April and June of 2000. The survey of foreign
tourists was conducted in either English or Spanish at the departure lounge of the
international airport in Santa Elena, Peten. This is the principle conduit for tourists who visit Tikal, and was considered to be an ideal location where travelers
would have suﬃcient time to dedicate to the survey with few distractions. Due to
prior experience with similar surveys, it was decided that the target population for
the survey of locals should be secondary school-educated locals. The survey of
local residents was conducted in Spanish at the site of the University Center of
Peten as well as in the central plazas of Flores and Santa Elena. The university
oﬀers courses in agronomy, forestry, archeology, and administration of tourism. It
is considered to be a center where a variety of secondary school-educated locals
would converge.
Given that the experimental design produced 24 diﬀerent choice set combinations, these were each presented to eight diﬀerent individuals in both populations.
Thus each survey sample was comprised of 192 individuals. With each individual
responding to three choice group sets, 576 observations were possible for each
population. Because a few respondents did elect a ‘No Preference’ option when
presented with choice sets, the ﬁnal data set included 499 observations for foreign
tourists and 532 observations for locals.
The collected data was analyzed in order to estimate the probability of selecting a
labeled alternative corresponding to conservation goals (A ¼ Intermediately
Satisfactory, Satisfactory, Highly Satisfactory). The systematic component of the utility
function was assumed to be a linear function of the selected attributes with the form:

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

311

Vi ¼ a1 Satisfactoryi þ a2 Highly Satisfactoryi þ b1 Little Managementi
þ b2 Adequate Managementi þ b3 Rural Cabinsi þ b4 Ecolodgei
þ b5 With Guidesi þ b6 Without Human Settlementsi
þ b7 Paved Roadsi þ b8 $5:00 Entrance Feei
þ b9 $10:00 Entrance Feei

ð4Þ

These variables are all considered to be discrete changes from the status quo levels
presented.
Assuming independently and identically distributed (IID) error terms with an
extreme value type 1 Gumbel distribution, a multinomial logit model can be used
to estimate the attribute coeﬃcients. Violations of IID would be reﬂected in violations of the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) (Louviere, 1996). In order
to test for IID/IIA violations, a series of Hausman–McFadden tests were conducted. This test analyzes the impact of the removal of a choice from the data set
on the probability of the selection of the remaining choices. Because the elimination
of each choice from the complete data set resulted in a singular covariance matrix,
these tests were not conclusive. Thus, the multinomial logit model was used.
4. Results and discussion
The research was designed under the assumption that there are two distinct populations, middle-class Peteneros and foreign tourists. The survey instrument was
identical for both groups, with the exception of the language used and the denomination of the entry fees in U.S. dollars for tourists and quetzals for locals. This is
in accordance with established practice throughout Central America, where
nationals pay a reduced entrance fee. Table II presents the socioeconomic characteristics of the survey respondents. Both samples are relatively well educated. The
sample of foreign visitors demonstrates a high percentage of low-income and lowexpenditure backpack tourists.
An initial test of the equality of the preference orderings between the two populations was conducted under procedures outlined by Swait and Louviere (1993)
and Blamey and Bennett (2001). The equality of the combined coeﬃcients and
scale parameters was rejected with a likelihood ratio test of the form:
2½log Lðpooled dataÞ  log LðforeignÞ  log LðlocalÞ ¼ 68:08  v211 ;
ð5Þ
where, log L is the log-likelihood estimated from the corresponding model with 11
degrees of freedom for the ten restricted parameters and the varying scale parameter l. Given that the critical value for the v2 distribution at the 95% conﬁdence
level is 19.68, the equality of the combined coeﬃcients and scale parameters
between the two populations was rejected. The relative scale parameter

312

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

TABLE II. Socioeconomic characteristics of survey respondents.
Socioeconomic characteristics
Foreign n = 192
Origin

Percentage
USA and Canada
Europe
Latin America
Other

48
42
8
2

Sex

Male
Female

44
56

Education

Primary and secondary
University
Postgraduate

14
70
16

Annual income

$24,000 or less
$24,000 to $48,000
$48,000 and greater

55
25
20

Daily expenditure

$30 or less
$31 – $50
$50 or more

53
20
27

Peten
Other

92
8

Sex

Male
Female

59
41

Education

Primary
Secondary
University

3
53
43

Annual income

Q24,000 or less
Q24,000 or more

76
24

Guatemalans n = 192
Origin

lforeign =lnational was estimated to be 0.80, and the variables for the data from the
survey of national tourists were adjusted for the pooled data. This enabled the
comparison of the b coeﬃcients of the two groups. The resultant likelihood ratio
of 67.73 was calculated and compared to the critical value of 14.07, and the
hypothesis of identical preferences across populations was rejected. This test demonstrates that the two populations, Peteneros and foreign tourists, represent diﬀerent preference orderings. Thus, two models of preference orderings are presented.
Results for the multinomial logit analyses for both populations are presented in
Table III. Both populations had signiﬁcant preferences for the ‘Adequate Management’ over the status quo. Foreign tourists also preferred ‘Little Management’ to
the status quo, although they had stronger preferences towards the higher management level. Both populations preferred ‘Observation with Guides’ relative to the
status quo of ‘Without Guides.’ Foreign tourists declared a signiﬁcant preference
for ‘Ecolodge’ in relation to the current situation of ‘No Lodging.’ This was the
lodging option which promised the most comfort. Foreign tourists did not have a
signiﬁcant preference for ‘Rural Cabins,’ and the local population did not have a
signiﬁcant preference for any lodging alternative.

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

313

TABLE III. Results of multinomial logit model of preferences for attributes.
Attributes

National Park
Management

Lodging
Wildlife
Observation
Human
Settlements
Access Roads
Entrance fees

Alternative
Speciﬁc Constant,
conservation
levels

Foreign Tourists (n = 499)
(signiﬁcance of the model
v29 ¼ 170)

Local Residents (n = 532)
(signiﬁcance of the model
v29 ¼ 145)

Coeﬃcient

Standard error

Coeﬃcient

0.3845*

0.1570

0.0760

0.1498

0.9913**

0.1565

1.3292**

0.1499

0.0731
0.4070**
0.5453**

0.1495
0.1430
0.1273

0.0061
0.0650
0.4139**

0.1361
0.1404
0.1229

Without
human
settlements
Paved
$5.00 or 5.00
quetzal
$10.00 or
10 quetzal
B satisfactory

)0.2302*

0.1207

0.2314*

0.1137

)0.3118**
1.2632**

0.1202
0.1575

0.4247**
0.2316*

0.1176
0.1404

0.6026**

0.1663

)0.1928

0.1472

0.6229**

0.1261

)01693

0.1236

C excellent

0.2584*

0.1360

Levels

Little
management
Adequate
management
Rural cabins
Ecolodge
With guides

0.2281*

Standard error

0.1159

* signiﬁcant at the 90% conﬁdence level; ** signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level (P[|Z| > z]).

These populations diﬀered in their preferences towards paved access roads. Foreign tourists had a signiﬁcant preference for the status quo of unpaved access
roads, while locals declared a signiﬁcant preference for pavement. It is possible
that this reﬂects a greater concern by foreigners for protecting the tropical forest
ecosystem by maintaining remoteness. Locals would be expected to appreciate the
facilitated transport and increased commerce that is possible with pavement. The
divergent opinions might also reﬂect that local residents might have a better
understanding of the beneﬁts of pavement. Since the interviews were conducted
during Guatemala’s dry season, tourists might not appreciate the diﬃculties
encountered on unpaved roads during the rainy season.
Residents and tourists also disagreed in their preferences towards colonists
inside the MBR. Foreign tourists had signiﬁcant preferences towards maintaining
the status quo and allowing illegal migrants to remain in the MBR. Local residents of Peten’s urban centers of Flores and Santa Elena declared a signiﬁcant
preference for the removal of these colonists.
Perhaps the most intriguing result of the multinomial logit model is the respondents’ stated preference for an entrance fee. Both populations demonstrated a
signiﬁcant preference for paying an entrance fee of either $5.00 or 5.00 quetzals as
opposed to the status quo of no entrance fee. This signiﬁcant result contradicts economic theory that postulates that ceteris paribus an individual would prefer to pay

314

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

more to less and prefer to pay zero than to have a positive payment. Furthermore,
the positive preference for a payment negates the possibility of estimating willingness to pay from the results of the multinomial logit model. However, this result
should not be discounted, nor rejected automatically as the result of yea-saying
behavior. It merely demonstrates a recognition of the beneﬁts of user fees.
Although both populations demonstrated a preference for an entrance fee of
$5.00/5.00 quetzals over no payments, they also showed a preference for an entrance
fee of $5.00/5.00 quetzals over an entrance fee of $10.00/10.00 quetzals. This result
is presented in Table III, which comes from the same model as presented in
Table II, only with the entrance fees recoded such that the $5.00/5.00 fee is the baseline to which the other alternatives are compared. Table IV shows that for foreign
tourists the $5.00 entrance fee is preferred to both the $10.00 fee and the $0 fee at
the 99% conﬁdence level and that for local residents the 5.00 quetzal fee is preferred
to both the 10.00 quetzal fee and the 0 quetzal fee at the 90% conﬁdence level.
In order to test for the impact of the respondents’ socioeconomic characteristics
on their preferences, mixed multinomial logit models were employed. These are
mixed models because they presuppose that the probability of selecting an alternative is a function of the attributes of the alternative and the attributes of the respondent (So and Kuhfeld, 1995). Two characteristics were considered to be particularly
important; these were daily expenditure for the foreign tourists and income for the
local residents. Daily tourist expenditure is an indicator of the type of tourist that
arrives and the impact of that tourist on the local economy. This is particularly
important because Peten is a destination for both low expenditure backpackers and
high-expenditure archeology enthusiasts. In general, the impact of these socioeconomic variables on the declared preferences was negligible. Table V presents all of
the signiﬁcant results. Tourists with higher daily expenditures were more likely to
prefer the presence of guides. Locals with higher levels of income were signiﬁcantly
less likely to prefer the higher levels of national park management.
5. Conclusions and observations
This analysis demonstrates that there is a signiﬁcant demand for improved
national park management and ecotourism services in the MBR. This demand,
demonstrated by the positive willingness-to-pay for entrance fees, comes from
TABLE IV. Test for preferences for entrance fee of $5.00/5.00 quetzals to alternatives.
Entrance fees

Fee levels

0
$5.00 or 5.00 quetzal
$10.00 or 10.00 quetzal

Foreign tourists n = 499

Local residents n = 532

Coeﬃcient

Coeﬃcient

)1.2632**
)
)0.5506**

Standard
Error
0.1575
)
0.1306

).2316*
)
).2508*

All other estimates and results are identical to those presented in this Table IV.
* signiﬁcant at the 90% conﬁdence level; ** signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level (P[|Z| > z])

Standard
Error
0.1404
)
0.1404

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

315

TABLE V. Results of mixed multinomial logit models with signiﬁcant interactions with socioeconomic
indicators.
Attributes

Levels

Foreign tourists (n = 499)
Coeﬃcient

National park
management

Lodging
Wildlife
observation
Human
settlements
Access roads
Entrance fees
Alternative
speciﬁc
constant,
conservation
levels
Interactions
with daily
expenditures

Interaction
with resident
income

Little
management
Adequate
management
Rural cabins
Ecolodge
With guides
Without human
settlements
Paved
$5.00
$10.00
B – satisfactory
C – excellent

Satisfactory
conservation *
daily expenditure
Excellent
conservation *
daily expenditure
With guides *
daily expenditure
Little management
* income

Standard
error

Local residents (n = 380)

Coeﬃcient

Standard
error

Coeﬃcient

Standard
error

0.337*

0.159

0.332*

0.158

1.235*

0.638

0.982**

0.158

0.995**

0.156

3.285**

0.633

0.071
0.414**
0.502**

0.151
0.144
0.129

0.085
0.398**
0.248

0.151
0.143
0.179

)0.026
)0.093
0.291*

0.168
0.164
0.155

)0.175

0.158

)0.249*

0.122

)0.232*

0.122

)0.317**
1.284**
0.621**
0.952**

0.121
0.159
0.168
0.185

)0.337**
1.310**
0.645**
0.668**

0.121
0.160
0.168
0.128

0.266

0.202

0.266

0.202

)0.154*

0.061

).005

0.061

0.144*

0.062

Adequate
management *
income

0.556**
0.144
0.035
0.370**

0.158
0.183
0.184
0.142

)0.089

0.152

)0.215

0.147

)0.423**

0.141

* signiﬁcant at 90% conﬁdence, ** signiﬁcant at 99% conﬁdence (P[|Z| > z])

tourists who have made the eﬀort to visit Peten but would like to diversify their
activities in the region in order to appreciate the ﬂora and fauna of the MBR. The
acceptance of entrance fees to pay for improved park management demonstrates
that tourism can ﬁnancially support nature conservation within protected areas.
And expanded nature-based tourism services should provide ﬁnancial incentive to
local residents to encourage tourism and support the conservation goals of the
MBR. Tourists’ preferences for guides and lodging should stimulate local entrepreneurs to provide these services.
Foreign tourists and local residents had similar, although unequal, preferences
towards ecotourism development in the MBR. Both groups preferred adequate
park management, wildlife viewing with guides, and an entrance fee. These preferences did not signiﬁcantly vary across the socioeconomic indicators of the survey
respondents. The demand for tourism services does not vary signiﬁcantly between
diﬀerent expenditure groups. There is a complementary interest in local residents

316

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

in supplying these services. The surveyed population of educated, middle-class
Peteneros would be those most likely to be contributing the services required to
support expanded tourism. The preferences of tourists and locals diverged in
respect to the presence of colonists within the MBR’s core zone and paved access
roads. This divergence in opinion might reﬂect general sensibilities of the international community towards access to rainforest and colonization.
The target population of secondary school-educated Peteneros is an important
stakeholder group. Many of the local survey respondents would be expected to
beneﬁt directly from the economic activity that tourism would attract. But this
target population is not representative of the entire local population because it
does not include the peasant farmers and forestry workers who live near to and
within the MBR. Further studies need to be conducted in order to understand
how these rural stakeholders would respond to and perhaps beneﬁt from ecotourism development. And further eﬀorts need to be made so that these individuals
consider themselves beneﬁciaries, along with the better educated Peteneros, of any
increased tourism.
The feasibility of nature-based tourism in the Peten is dependent not only upon
the natural beauty and unique species that can be encountered in the MBR, but
also upon the accessibility of the area, the available services, the sense of security
that is provided to tourists, the availability of complementary tourist and recreational activities, and the aﬀordability of travel. Given that the area including
southern Guatemala, Belize, and southern Mexico has substantial tourism there
appears to be aﬀordable regional travel with alternative complementary activities.
Thus the current constraint upon tourism in the MBR is the lack of facilities
within the National Parks, the services oﬀered, and the sense of security oﬀered to
tourists. This research has demonstrated positive preferences towards improved
National Park and increased tourist services by both local residents and foreign
tourists. This consensus among two critical stakeholder groups should encourage
greater interest in ecotourism development among investors and decision makers.
A remaining concern that can continue to inhibit tourism in Guatemala is the perception that the country is unsafe with continued civil discord.
The development of the MBR’s ecotourism potential should become a priority
for CONAP and the MBR managers. This development should become part of a
strategy of providing incentives to local populations to cooperate with the nature
conservation goals of the MBR. Other complementary eﬀorts to provide improved
security in tourist zones and to promote the MBR as an area of integrated naturebased and archeological tourism should prove beneﬁcial. The development of
nature-based tourism within the National Parks should assist in the overall nature
conservation goals of the MBR, especially since much of the area remains isolated
and in designated Biological Reserves.
Choice experiments is an appropriate tool to analyze preferences towards nonmarket environmental goods and services and ecotourism development. It is
appropriate to analyze changes from the status quo to a broad menu of possible
alternatives. However, results of this study demonstrate that researchers should be

ECOTOURISM IN GUATEMALA

317

careful with the inclusion of a ‘zero’ fee option. Respondents preferred a payment
of $5.00 or 5.00 quetzals over the absence of an entrance fee. This is an interesting
result that does not imply irrationality. However, given this preference the results
could not be used to present the respondents’ marginal willingness-to-pay for the
other attributes. If the estimation of respondents’ marginal willingness-to-pay is
an important research objective, researchers should carefully pretest when they use
very low payment levels.

Acknowledgements
Research was conducted while Hearne was Assistant Research Professor and Santos was Graduate Student at CATIE, the Tropical Agriculture Research and
Higher Education Center in Turrialba Costa Rica. Research was supported by a
scholarships provided by the German Service for Academic Interchange (DAAD)
and the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA). The authors thank
Gilberto Paez , CONAP, and The Nature Conservancy for their support during
the early stages of this research.

Notes
1

During data collection in 2000, the rate of exchange was 7.81 quetzals per dollar.

References
Adamowicz, W., Boxall, P., Williams, M. and Louviere, J.: 1998, ‘Stated preference approaches for
measuring passive use values: choice experiments and contingent valuation’, American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 80, 64–75.
Blamey, J. and Bennet. R.: 2001, ‘Yea-saying and Validation of a choice model of green product
choice’, in J. Bennett and R. Blamey (eds.), The Choice Modelling Approach to Environmental Valuation Cheltaham, UK, Edward Elgar, pp. 178–201.
Blamey, R., Bennett, J., Louviere, J., Morrison M. and Rolfe J.: 2000, ‘A test of policy labels in environmental Choice Modeling Studies’, Ecological Economics 32, 269–286.
Boxall, P., Adamowicz, W., Swait, J., Williams, M. and Louviere J.: 1996, ‘A comparison of stated
preference methods for environmental valuation’, Ecological Economics 18, 243–253.
DeShazo, J. and Fermo, G.: 2002, ‘Designing choices sets for stated preference methods: the eﬀects of
complexity on choice consistency’, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 44, 123–143.
Hanley, N., Wright, R. and Adamowicz, V.: 1998, ‘Using choice experiments to value the environment’,
Environment and Resource Economics 11(3–4), 413–428.
Hearne, R. and Salinas, Z.: 2002, ‘The use of choice experiments in the analysis of tourist preferences
for ecotourism development in costa rica’, Journal of Environmental Management 65(2): 153–163.
Herrera-MacBryde, O. and Villa-Lobos J.: undated, Fact Sheet on Peten Region and Maya Biosphere
Reserve. Smithsonian Institute. Available at http: //www.nmnh.si.edu/botany/projects/cpd/ma/
ma13.htm. checked 10/2003.
Kuhn, M.: 2000, ‘Biosphere reserves as planning models for sustainable regional development:
Schorfheide-Chorin, Germany’, Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 43, 897–904.

318

ROBERT R. HEARNE AND C. ALEJANDRO SANTOS

Lindberg. K, Dellaert. B. and Rassing, CR.: 1999, Resident tradeoﬀs. A choice modeling approach
Annals of Tourism Research 26(3), 554–569.
Louviere, J.: 1996, ‘Relating stated preference measures and models to choices in real markets: calibration of CV responses’ in D. Bjornstad and J. Kahn (eds.), The Contingent Valuation of Environmental
Resources: Methodological issues and research needs. Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar.
Louviere, J.: 2001, ‘choice experiments an overview of concepts and issues’, in J. Bennett and R.Blamey
(eds.), The Choice Modelling Approach to Environmental Valuation. Cheltaham U.K. Edward Elgar,
pp 13–36.
Morrison, M., Bennett J. and Blamey, R.: 1999, ‘’, Water Resources Research 35(9), 2805–2814.
Shriar, A.: 2002, ‘Food security and land use deforestation in rural Guatemala’, Food Policy 27,
395–414.
Swait, J. and Louviere J.: 1993, ‘The role of the scale parameter in the estimation and the comparison
of multinomial logit models’, Journal of Marketing Research 30:, 305–314.
So, Y. and Kuhfeld, W.: 1995, Multinomial Logit Models. Technical paper available at http: //ftp.sas.com/techsup/download/technote/ts273.pdf.
Sundberg, J.: 1988, NGO landscapes in the Maya biosphere reserve, Guatemala. The Geographical
Review 88(3), 388–390.

View publication stats

