Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Towards a new era for Cultural
Heritage Education: Discussing the
role of ICT
michela ott
Computers in Human Behavior

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

ICT and Cult ural Herit age Educat ion: Which Added Value
michela ot t

Towards an ICT-based psychology: E-psychology
AT HANASIOS DRIGAS
Teacher, What Do You Mean by “Creat ivit y”? An It alian Survey on t he Use of ICT t o Fost er St udent Cre…
michela ot t

Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers in Human Behavior
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comphumbeh

Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT
Michela Ott, Francesca Pozzi *
Istituto Tecnologie Didattiche – CNR, Via De Marini, 6, Genoa, Italy

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
ICT
Cultural Heritage Education
Educational Technology
Innovation

a b s t r a c t
Living and being part of today’s Knowledge Society implies recognizing the importance of the past and
imposes considering Cultural Heritage as a fundamental background of our identity.
This paper investigates how ICT tools can contribute to enhancing Cultural Heritage Education. It is an
attempt to answer the question concerning whether ICT can really provide any added value to Cultural
Heritage pedagogy, education and learning. By focusing on those Cultural Heritage artifacts that pertain
to the field of arts and archeology, the paper assumes a methodological perspective and provides examples of some of the most innovative experiences in the field, thus driving the reader to reflect on the pedagogical impact that may derive from exploiting ICT potentialities. ICT, in fact, on the one hand, offers an
easier access and a multi-perspective view of Cultural Heritage artifacts, and, on the other, may also
enrich and improve Cultural Heritage Education thanks to the adoption of innovative learning/teaching
methods.
Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Setting the scene
Cultural Heritage Education in most European countries was
based for a long time on traditional teaching methods; this meant
that it usually relied on face-to-face classroom lessons held by one
single teacher (often the one in charge of ‘‘Arts”), on the study of
printed materials (texts and images), and very seldom on watching
videos. Occasionally, the study of Cultural Heritage artifacts was
accompanied by on-site visits where students could come directly
in touch with the artifacts (Van der Leeuw-Roord, 2005). In any
case, the study of Cultural Heritage usually did not cross national
borders (Copeland, 2005), perhaps with the exception of those artifacts belonging to the closest cultures/countries.
This panorama started changing in Europe in 1998, with the
promulgation of the Recommendation No. R (98) 5 to Member
States,1 which, by calling for more active teaching methods and
for an interdisciplinary approach to Cultural Heritage Education,
triggered a significant step forward in the field. This implied that
Cultural Heritage Education became – and remained for some time
– an innovative and experimental sector, where in-field studies
and laboratorial activities prevailed over the more traditional
classroom lessons (Branchesi, 2006).
Strangely enough, such innovativeness has not (yet) reflected
openness to the introduction of ICT (Information and Communication Technology) in teaching and learning methods, which has, on

the contrary, characterized other disciplines in the last few years
(UNESCO, 2005). As a matter of fact, no specific reference was directly made in the Recommendation, as far as the use of ICT to support and enhance Cultural Heritage Education. As a consequence,
nowadays ICT, while being increasingly employed in the field of Cultural Heritage (Veltman, 2005) to produce large archives of materials
(Meyer, Grussenmeyer, Perrin, Durand, & Drap, 2007; Politou, Pavlidis, & Chamzas, 2004), to support scientific research2 and to foster
the maintenance/preservation of Cultural Heritage artifacts3 (Cappitelli, Toniolo, & Townsend, 2007; Chassagne, Bou-Saïd, Ceccotti, Jullien, & Togni, 2007; Lytras, Damiani, & Ordóñez de Pablos, 2008;
Lytras & Ordóñez de Pablos, 2009), has not yet affected the approaches
to teaching and learning in Cultural Heritage Education enough (Lytras
& Garcia, 2008; Lytras & Ordóñez de Pablos, 2007; Ordóñez de Pablos,
2002; Rodriguez Pérez & Ordóñez de Pablos, 2003; Twining, 2005).
The present contribution, drawing on a survey carried out by
the authors in the framework of a number of national and
European projects, explores how ICT, and in particular Technology
Enhanced Learning models, methods and approaches can fruitfully
contribute to better spread knowledge about Cultural Heritage
artifacts. By providing examples of innovative experiences in
this field, it helps the reader to reflect on the potential benefits
for school contexts, leaving aside awareness raising activities

2

See Arnold and Geser (2008).
An interesting attempt to create a link between the areas of Digitization of
Cultural Heritage and Conservation Practice/Education can be found at: http://
www.ikonosheritage.org/cataloguing.php with specific reference to the Introductory
Course to Mediterranean Cultural Heritage http://www.ikonosheritage.org/courses/
(accessed January 2010).
3

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 10 6475338; fax: +39 10 6475300.
E-mail addresses: ott@itd.cnr.it (M. Ott), pozzi@itd.cnr.it (F. Pozzi).
1
http://www.kultura.ejgv.euskadi.net/r46-4874/es/contenidos/informacion/mani
fiestos_patrimonio/es_8658/adjuntos/DOC56.pdf (accessed January 2010).
0747-5632/$ - see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

2

M. Ott, F. Pozzi / Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx

addressing the general public, which have peculiarities of their
own and present problems of a different kind.
In particular, this paper looks at the matter from a methodological point of view, with the main aim of answering the question
whether there is any added value in adopting ICT in Cultural Heritage Education. The easiest and most obvious answer to this question is that ICT may contribute to ‘‘open” the doors of cultural
patrimony to a wide number of people and that it allows communication and exchanges among people, thus favoring the sharing of
knowledge, information and ideas. As a consequence, it is evident
that the use of ICT may per se contribute to concretely drive people
to recognize the importance of the past, by helping them better
appreciate and value the background of today’s Knowledge Society.
Furthermore, looking beyond the fact that ICT may provide enlarged access to Cultural Heritage Education, the authors also see
that technology, when appropriately used, may introduce significant changes in the way one can look at and approach the study
of Cultural Heritage. In fact, it allows:
 An enriched and multi-perspective view of artifacts deriving
from the fact that they are available in a digital form.
 The adoption of innovative teaching and learning methods.
 In the following two sections the above mentioned affordances
are further described and discussed.
2. The role of ICT in looking at Cultural Heritage: what changes?
As a matter of fact, in recent years almost all the developed
countries have created free electronic archives and have made relevant attempts at digitizing their Cultural Heritage (UNESCO,
2005).
Just to provide a couple of examples, the MINERVA EC4 (eContentPlus) is a thematic network in the area of cultural, scientific information and scholarly content, working on the digitization and online
accessibility of cultural material and digital preservation across the
EU. The MICHEAL project5 (e-TEN) is a European attempt to create
digital collections from museums, archives, libraries and other cultural institutions from across Europe.
At present, then, the number of digital resources potentially
available for study purposes is amazing: the production of high
quality DVDs and CDs about heritage is huge and the quantity of
web portals providing specific materials for the study of arts and/
or civilizations is enormous. This allows the teachers to propose
educational activities relying on electronic means, which, on the
one hand, can support the in-depth study of single objects and,
on the other, may allow an overall comprehension of the (historical, geographical, economical, etc.) framework where they
originated.

Fig. 1. The dome of St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome: different perspectives and details of
the cross at the top.

details, such as the cross at the top of the dome, are also hardly visible to the naked eye!). Fig. 1 is far more interesting when considering that this is not a pre-determined representation of the dome
(as the ones you may find by looking at a book), but rather it is the
result of a search on the web, carried out by a reader who wanted
to focus on the different perspectives of the dome.
In addition to still pictures showing different aspects/parts of an
artifact, digital technology may also allow the user to ‘‘customize”
the view of objects: for instance, starting from a 3D picture of St.
Peter’s dome, the user, by using specific software features (e.g.
zoom, rotation, etc.) can obtain a ‘‘personal” view of the dome itself. All these software features may significantly contribute to personalizing the observation and the in-depth study of Cultural
Heritage artifacts.
2.2. Wide-angle lens on artifacts

2.1. Zoom lens on artifacts
With the advent of digital technologies, Cultural Heritage artifacts can be viewed both as a whole and in their minimal details;
images are no longer strictly bi-dimensional, and detailed study
and zoom possibilities of every kind/level are possible. What’s
more, the representation of artifacts becomes dynamic and interactive: it is the user herself who can directly choose the dimension,
the level of detail and also the viewpoint to access each single
artifact.
In Fig. 1 the dome of St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome is shown as an
example of how digital technologies allow a vision both from different perspectives and at different levels of detail (some of these
4
5

http://www.minervaeurope.org/ (accessed January 2010).
http://www.michael-culture.org/en/home (accessed January 2010).

As mentioned above, the new type/level of description of Cultural Heritage objects which is available thanks to digital technologies, allows one to appreciate each single artifact in all its, even
minimal, details. Nevertheless, ICT offers even more: it allows the
user to shift from looking at each object as a single, isolated element, to viewing it as part of the wider context, where it lives or
has been created/inserted.
Contexts can be various and may differ in shape, nature and
size; moreover, they can be real or reconstructed (i.e. those contexts
that have been virtually built on the basis of available data)
(Cavalli, Colosi, Pignatti, & Poscolieri, 2001). An architectural
object, for instance, can be viewed in its natural context (i.e. the
context where it is situated nowadays), but can also be seen in
its original context, which may have been virtually reconstructed
on the basis of objective data (Barceló, Forte, & Sanders, 2000).

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

M. Ott, F. Pozzi / Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx

3

Fig. 3. An avatar walking along the Ancient Appia Road (The Appia Antica project
was carried out by ITABC – CNR and it is described in http://www.itabc.cnr.it/
VHLab/Projects_appia.htm (accessed January 2010).).

Fig. 2. Vettiis’ house in Pompeii: real and reconstructed context.

As an example, thanks to a reconstruction, it is possible to see the
‘‘Casa dei Vettii” (Vettiis’ house)6 in the archaeological site of Pompeii, both in its present context and in the virtually reconstructed
one (Fig. 2); by choosing the virtual context, the house can be viewed
from different stand points, with a different level of graphical detail,
architectural elements can be isolated and studied in detail and from
different perspectives, by also varying the source of light.
The possibility of examining the context and the landscape
where a Cultural Heritage artifact was/is located has important
consequences on the study of the artifact itself and on its analysis
and evaluation. In this sense, an emerging field is that of ‘‘Landscape Archaeology”, which is quite new and is strongly based on
the use of ICT; it puts particular ‘‘emphasis on the study of the relationships between archaeological data (e.g. between sites and/or
cultural modifications to landscapes such as ditches, burial
mounds, field systems, roads, etc.) and such cultural phenomena
and their natural setting or environment”.7
Moreover, Virtual Reality techniques allow students to actually
‘‘live” sites (for instance archaeological sites) and move around
them, instead of simply looking at images or reading about them
(Barceló et al., 2000) (see Fig. 3).
The project ‘‘Rome Reborn” 8 is an example of the possibilities offered by digital technology for looking at (and, consequently, for
studying) cultural artifacts ‘‘from the inside”. The project, carried
out at the University of Virginia, makes a consistent use of virtual
reality techniques in an educational perspective and has the main
aim of representing ‘‘the first step in the creation of a virtual time
machine, which our children and grandchildren will use to study
6
This is a project carried out by ITABC – CNR and it is described in http://
www.itabc.cnr.it/VHLab/Projects_Vettii.htm (accessed January 2010).
7
Citation from Wikipedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landscape_archaeology
(accessed January 2010).
8
http://www.romereborn.virginia.edu/ (accessed January 2010).

the history of Rome and many other great cities around the world”
(Frischer, 2003). It drives the user/student into the Rome of A.D.
320, at the time of the emperor Constantine, and shows the reconstruction of some 7000 buildings of the city. Field experts have rebuilt almost the entire city within its 21-km-long wall, including
the Senate, the Colosseum and the Basilica of Massenzio, complete
with frescoes and decorations. Buildings, that are now almost completely in ruins, have also been recreated with a ‘‘high probability”
of accuracy, in such a way that a visitor can move around, having
the feeling of walking around streets, entering buildings and looking
at them ‘‘from the inside”.
3. The role of ICT in teaching and learning Cultural Heritage:
what changes?
In the previous section the main changes brought about by the
digitization of contents in the field of Cultural Heritage, namely the
perspectives available when viewing artifacts in the new ‘‘digital”
form, have been put forward briefly.
In addition to such innovation, in the field of Cultural Heritage
Education further relevant opportunities are available as a consequence of exploiting ICT-based innovative learning approaches.
3.1. Personalized, inquiry-based learning approaches
As already mentioned, ICT may guarantee the access to a huge
amount of information, which – by its own nature – lays itself open
to be ‘‘discovered”, rather than ‘‘taught”. This goes in the direction
of supporting on the one hand active, experiential learning approaches and, on the other, the personalization of learning itineraries: students can access information in many different ways, thus
playing an active role in information retrieval and in building up
their own learning path, on the basis of their interests, personal
aims, needs, etc. This, besides fostering the acquisition of contents,
will improve their ability to retrieve information, their methods of
evaluation and – more in general – their approach to learning.
In this panorama, WebQuests9 have recently been pointed out as
a powerful method allowing inquiry-oriented activities based on online resources (March, 2003). A good example in the field is the
TwinningQuest called MedcGame, a collaborative game elaborated
within the project MedMySea,10 whose main aim is to involve students from Italy and Greece in an active learning process, with the
9
10

http://webquest.org/index.php (accessed January 2010).
http://www.medmysea.eu/index.php (accessed January 2010).

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

4

M. Ott, F. Pozzi / Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx

aim of fostering valorization of the Cultural Heritage and promoting
an intercultural exchange between students of the two countries. By
adopting such an active approach to learning, teachers, rather then
being experts of contents, become mentors, their role becomes that
of designing the learning path, acting as a guide for students and
supporting them during the inquiry process.
As far as personalization is concerned, even the research thread
focusing on semantic web and ontological issues is providing further stimuli and opening new possibilities to education in general
(Vargas-Vera & Lytras, 2008), and, more specifically, to the field of
Cultural Heritage Education.
3.2. Enriched situated learning approaches
Situated learning approaches stress the importance of the cultural and social context where learning takes place, since this context is strictly intertwined with the knowledge development
process (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989); from this perspective,
school can no longer be the only place for education. Educational
experiences, especially those concerning Cultural Heritage, should
occur in different places, so that students may directly come in
touch with the artifact and/or environment to be studied.
As a matter of fact, this has already been acknowledged and fostered by the already mentioned Recommendation of the Council of
Europe, where they state that European heritage classes should involve ‘‘fieldwork outside the school”, so that students may ‘‘discover
the richness of heritage in its context. . .”.
Today, thanks to the use of ICT, further interesting possibilities
are opened. In particular, in pervasive and ubiquitous learning
learners are able to freely perform educational activities (possibly
cooperating and/or collaborating with others) using multiple devices and networks as they move in an environment (Economides,
2009). Furthermore, taking advantage of the use of mobile technologies, students may carry out ICT-based learning activities in a
variety of settings, ranging from the traditional places where this
usually occurs (classroom, lab, home, etc.), to places that are even
far away from the ‘‘typical” ones, such as museums, archeological
sites, etc. (Ruiz, Solano, Moreno, & Pajares, 2008). Thanks to mobile
devices, students may be asked to gather data or take annotations
in the field, so that afterwards they can elaborate and interpret
them. Besides, communication and collaboration facilities offered
by mobile technologies should not be underestimated, which
may allow data sharing and knowledge co-construction by students, thus paving the way to collaborative approaches to learning.
Another interesting affordance offered by technologies, such as
GPS or RFID systems, consists in providing visitors of archaeological sites with mobiles, so that they can get information concerning
points of interests while walking along a given pathway, so as to
enrich data coming from ‘‘direct observation” with further, ‘‘external” data. Such use of technology can also be exploited with inclusive aims, as happens for example in Genoa (Italy), where a system
has been implanted in Villa Serra11 to guide blind visitors along a
pathway, so as to provide them with useful information about the
points of interests they meet during their visit to the park.
3.3. Interdisciplinary learning approaches
ICT offers Cultural Heritage Education a new, interdisciplinary
dimension, by providing the possibility of looking at each artifact
within a broader network of historical, socio-cultural, economical
and geographical links, which allow its better understanding and
interpretation. Thanks to ICT, such a network becomes potentially
unlimited and opens the way to genuinely interdisciplinary
11

http://www.chiossone.net/file/progetti_urban.pdf (accessed January 2010).

approaches, involving a number of subject matters and teachers,
so as to extend the study of artifacts to their overall cultural context.
For example, the website ‘‘GreatBuildings”12 allows one to
search information concerning the world of architecture, by providing data on buildings and architects (which are documented with
images, drawings, integrated maps and timelines, 3D building models, commentaries, bibliographies, web links), so as to provide a rich
and complex picture not only of the building at hand but also of their
world and age. Correspondingly, a project addressing, let’s say, the
study of an artist and of her works may entail not only the study
of their main artistic features, but also the study of the civilization
where she lived, the socio-cultural conditions at that time, the links
with others populations, cultures and artists, etc.
As an example, the study of the Colosseum in Rome may be enriched with the study of other Roman amphitheaters (see Fig. 4) so
to enhance the comprehension both of the peculiar features of this
type of building (common and distinctive traits) and of the existing
links among cultures and populations (common and distinctive
traits).
From this point of view, ICT can offer unlimited possibilities of
finding out new, unexplored links thus providing a more ‘‘global”
perspective of Cultural Heritage artifacts that can be seen (and
studied) not only as isolated objects, but rather as products of a
number of strictly intertwined factors of different nature (socioeconomical, historical, geographical, cultural, . . .).
3.4. Collaborative learning experiences
Socio-constructivism emphasizes negotiation as the basic element in the process of knowledge development, and considers language, dialogue and collaboration as the main learning tools
(Vygotsky, 1962); from this perspective, ICT may effectively support collaborative approaches to learning. Collaborative learning
activities in the field of Cultural Heritage, such as peer-to-peer
communication (Bostrom, Gupta, & Hill, 2008), data exchange,
joint elaboration of information, etc. become possible not only at
local level (e.g. among students belonging to the same class), but
even among students of different classes, even if they are very ‘‘far”
from one another (classes from different regions, countries, cultures, etc.), thus widening the spectrum of learning possibilities offered by the educational intervention. Among the tools that it is
possible to adopt to foster collaboration, those offered by web
2.0 (wiki, blogs, folksonomies, etc.) also allow groups of students
to produce shared artifacts (Sigala, 2007).
Recent experiences are also studying the impact of collaboration in VR (Virtual Reality) contexts. For example, the research
team working at the Polytechnic of Milano (Barbieri & Paolini,
2001; Di Blas & Poggi, 2006), which has developed a number of virtual environments,13 is presently studying the possibilities offered
by making people interact within such environments, so as to reconstruct the typical situation of a ‘‘real tour”, where visitors meet
other visitors and interact.
3.5. From formal education to informal learning approaches
The concept of ‘‘informal learning” which is nowadays widely
used in the educational sector to indicate those learning processes
which occur spontaneously, outside a formal educational setting
(Livingstone, 2001), is not new: back in 1985, Combs (Coombs,
1985) defined informal learning as ‘‘the spontaneous, unstructured
learning that goes on daily in the home and neighborhood, behind
12

http://www.greatbuildings.com/ (accessed January 2010).
See for example the 3D ‘‘Ideal City of Leonardo”, a Virtual Reality Reconstruction
of the Ideal City Model at the National Science Museum Leonardo da Vinci in Milan,
Italy. http://www.museoscienza.org/IdealCity/default.htm (accessed January 2010).
13

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

M. Ott, F. Pozzi / Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx

5

Fig. 4. Amphitheaters in Rome, Syracuse, Arles and Capua Vetere.

the school and on the play field, in the workplace, marketplace, library
and museum, and through the various mass media”. Nowadays, informal learning is no longer defined only in terms of the place where
learning occurs, but also on the basis of the kind of activities carried out and on the processes activated during the learning experience. Recently, Sefton-Green (2004) also investigated how young
students usually learn with ICT outside the school, thus highlighting the existing strong link between ICT and informal learning. It is,
in fact, unquestionable that today’s students, who can realistically
be considered as ‘‘Digital Natives” (Prensky, 2001), are continuously immersed in ICT-based activities, which – despite their being
carried out in informal settings – often develop knowledge, abilities and competences.
ICT, no doubt, consistently broadens the number and kind of
occasions of informal learning even in the field of Cultural Heritage. In particular, ICT may provide the chance of going deeper into
matters which had been previously addressed in formal contexts,
thus encouraging self-regulated learning approaches (Al-Mubaid,
2008).
In addition, the marriage between ICT and informal learning in
the specific field of Cultural Heritage is particularly fecund, in that
recently it has also become quite common for ‘‘institutions of informal education, such as museums, media research, and cultural centers
to embrace advanced virtual technologies” and ‘‘. . . the use of these
advanced systems for the implementation of heritage programs in
public spaces, enables these institutions to investigate their educational potential while effectively shaping how they deliver public
awareness and entertainment.” (Roussou, 2002). This means that,
thanks to the use of ICT, institutions where typically informal
learning already took place, can now intensify their ability to attract people and involve them in more interesting and meaningful
learning experiences.

4. Discussion
The considerations reported above derive from the authors’
involvement in a number of ongoing projects, both at national
and European level, which have allowed gaining an overview on
the most evident changes brought about by ICT use in the field
of Cultural Heritage Education.
Preliminary results of the surveys carried out within the above
mentioned projects confirm that an appropriate adoption of ICT
tools and methods in Cultural Heritage Education may have a
strong pedagogical impact.
First of all, if we look at the field of Cultural Heritage Education
in the light of the tools and educational methods made available by
ICT, we see that a number of new scenarios are opened, where barriers, boundaries, time and space limits seem to diminish or almost
disappear.
ICT may also allow one to approach the study of Cultural Heritage artifacts by shifting from a subject oriented approach to an inter/cross/multidisciplinary one, in such a way that, despite the
subject-based approach of many educational systems in Europe,
students may by contrast appraise the very nature of learning
and of knowledge, which are intrinsically interdisciplinary.
Moreover, the concept of ‘‘internationalization of cultures” has
concrete possibilities to shift from being a myth to becoming reality: cultural artifacts can be easily viewed and shared far beyond
national/regional boundaries, thus becoming a common patrimony
of all people, irrespective of the place where they are born/live. As
a consequence, a different vision of Cultural Heritage artifacts may
arise: from the idea of regional/national patrimony to the feeling of
a common patrimony for all the cultures. The acknowledgment
both of ‘‘cultural diversity” and ‘‘common roots” emerges as a result of the possibility of studying/comparing a multiplicity of

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

6

M. Ott, F. Pozzi / Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx

cultural objects and of discussing and communicating with people
of different cultures; this goes both in the direction of strengthening links among people having common roots and of understanding basic cultural differences thus also providing a significant
added value to civics.
If the adoption of ICT-based tools and methods in the field of
Cultural Heritage Education, helps to avoid or reduce cultural barriers, it can also help to decrease to some extent other kinds of barriers, such as those related to disability. As a matter of fact, due to
physical sensorial or cognitive impairments some students may
have limited experiences also in the field of Cultural Heritage Education (Klironomos, Antona, Basdekis, Stephanidis, & EDeAN Secretariat for 2005, 2006) and the use of specific computer-based tools
and environments, as well as related interactive learning experiences may turn out to be especially enriching for them.
Thanks to the use of ICT, then, the accessibility to Cultural Heritage patrimony can be fostered, by designing interventions according to a ‘‘design for all” approach (for instance, by differentiating
the types of digital resources available for the same heritage object,
e.g. still images, videos, text to speech, or audio-taped descriptions).
The ambitious goal of providing ‘‘equal educational opportunities to
all people” is, thus, instantiated by the fact that – thanks to the new
technological tools – the number of people that may have some kind
of access to cultural objects is potentially enlarged. Teachers and
educators are nowadays allowed to choose web-based materials
that can be more easily accessed and used by all learners, in an inclusive perspective. This contributes, again, to making Cultural Heritage
a common patrimony of all people, irrespective of their actual physical, mental, sensorial disabilities and also contributes to the recognition of the right of all students to have the same educational
opportunities (Molla & Al-Jaghoub, 2007).
5. Conclusions
The central question of whether a significant added value is offered by ICT to Cultural Heritage Education has been answered
above: ICT, if properly and suitably used, can contribute to innovate, tune, channel and improve educational interventions also in
this field.
The use of ICT, in fact, enlarges incredibly the range/number of
heritage artifacts that are potentially available for educational purposes by offering the possibility of getting in touch with them also
at a distance. In addition, digital technologies also offer significant
new possibilities for both actualizing active learning approaches,
and personalizing learning activities according to specific attitudes,
tastes, talents and needs of students.
The chance to study, work and perform educational tasks not in
isolation but in cooperation with others also opens new frontiers:
students can easily communicate with each other and with all the
other actors in the educational process, thus exchanging ideas,
opinions and materials about Cultural Heritage objects.
In this panorama, new challenges are to be addressed (Veltman,
2005) but at the same time new educational scenarios are opened
offering genuine interdisciplinarity, authentic internationalization
of culture, and a wider accessibility.
There is, nevertheless, evidence from research (Moseley et al.,
1999) that in almost all educational fields ICT do not make the difference per se, simply by being used: rather, educational interventions need to be carefully planned by people who, besides being
expert and skillful in the specific subject matter, are also willing
and able to make effective educational use of technological tools
(Lytras, 2007). This calls for further research in the field, in order
to design and develop pilot experiences aiming at closing the gap
between technology enhanced learning and Cultural Heritage,
and finally to find good practices to be disseminated.

References
Al-Mubaid, H. (2008). Designing and managing intervention methods to promote
self-regulated learning. International Journal of Teaching and Case Studies, 1(3),
224–233.
Arnold, D., & Geser, G. (2008). EPOCH research agenda for the applications of ICT to
cultural heritage, Online Full Report. <http://public-repository.epoch-net.org/
publications/RES_AGENDA/final_res.pdf> (accessed January 2010).
Barbieri, T., & Paolini, P. (2001). Cooperation Metaphors for Virtual Museums. In
Proceedings of museums and the web 2001 (pp. 115–126). Pittsburgh, PA:
Archives & Museum Informatics. <http://www.archimuse.com/mw2001/
papers/barbieri/barbieri.html> (accessed January 2010).
Barceló, J. A., Forte, M., & Sanders, D. H. (2000). Virtual reality in archaeology. Oxford:
Archaeopress.
Bostrom, R. P., Gupta, S., & Hill, J. R. (2008). Peer-to-peer technology in collaborative
learning networks: Applications and research issues. International Journal of
Knowledge and Learning, 4(1), 36–57.
Branchesi, L. (2006). La pedagogia del patrimonio e la sua valutazione: ambiti di
ricerca, metodologie, risultati e prospettive. In L. Branchesi (Ed.), Il patrimonio
Culturale e la sua pedagogia per l’Europa. Roma: Armando Editore.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of
learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Cappitelli, F., Toniolo, L., & Townsend, J. (2007). Londra: Archetype.
Cavalli, R. M., Colosi, F., Pignatti, S., & Poscolieri, M. (2001). Ricostruzione dell’impianto
viario dell’antica Selinunte attraverso il telerilevamento iperspettrale MIVIS. AIT
Informa – Rivista Italiana di Telerilevamento, 20(21), 49–59.
Chassagne, P., Bou-Saïd, E., Ceccotti, A., Jullien, J. F, & Togni, M. (2007). The
contribution of numerical simulation for the diagnosis of the conservation of art
objects. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 8(3), 215–222.
Coombs, P. H. (1985). The world crisis in education: A view from the eighties. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Copeland, T. (2005). Heritage and education: A European perspective. In Proceedings
of the Europa nostra forum – Heritage and education: A European Perspective (pp.
39–41). The Hague.
Di Blas, N., & Poggi, C. (2006). 3D for Cultural Heritage and education: Evaluating the
impact. In Proceedings of museums and the web 2006. Toronto: Archives &
Museum Informatics. <http://www.archimuse.com/mw2006/papers/diblas/
diblas.html> (accessed January 2010).
Economides, A. A. (2009). Adaptive context-aware pervasive and ubiquitous
learning. International Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning, 1(3), 169–192.
Frischer, B. (2003). Mission and recent projects of the UCLA cultural virtual reality
laboratory. In Proceedings of the conference virtual retrospect 2003 (pp. 65–76).
Klironomos, I., Antona, M., Basdekis, I., Stephanidis, C., & EDeAN Secretariat for 2005
(2006). White paper: Promoting design for all and e-accessibility in Europe.
Universal Access in the Information Society International Journal, 5(1), 105–119.
Livingstone, D. W. (2001). Adults’ informal learning: Definitions, findings, gaps and
future research. NALL working paper # 21-2001. <http://www.oise.utoronto.ca/
depts/sese/csew/nall/res/21adultsifnormallearning.htm> (accessed January 2010).
Lytras, M. D. (2007). Teaching in the knowledge society: An art of passion.
International Journal of Teaching and Case Studies, 1(1/2), 1–9.
Lytras, M. D., Damiani, E., & Ordóñez de Pablos, P. (2008). Web 2.0: The business
model. Springer.
Lytras, M. D., & Garcia, R. (2008). Semantic web applications: A framework for
industry and business exploitation – What is needed for the adoption of the
semantic web from the market and industry. International Journal of Knowledge
and Learning, 4(1), 93–108.
Lytras, M., & Ordóñez de Pablos, P. (2007). Red gate corner: A web 2.0 prototype for
knowledge and learning concerning China business and culture. International
Journal of Knowledge and Learning, 3(4&5), 542–548.
Lytras, M. D, & Ordóñez de Pablos, P. (2009). Social web evolution. Integrating
semantic applications and web 2.0 technologies. IGI-Global.
March, T. (2003). The learning power of WebQuests. Educational Leadership, 61(4),
42–47.
Meyer, É., Grussenmeyer, P., Perrin, J. P., Durand, A., & Drap, P. A. (2007). Web
information system for the management and the dissemination of Cultural
Heritage data. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 8(4), 396–411.
Molla, A., & Al-Jaghoub, S. (2007). Evaluating digital inclusion projects: A livelihood
approach. International Journal of Knowledge and Learning, 3(6), 592–611.
Moseley, D., Higgins, S., Bramald, R., Hardman, F., Miller, J., Mroz, M., et al. (1999).
Ways forward with ICT: Effective pedagogy using information and communications
technology for literacy and numeracy in primary schools. <http://
www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/documents/00001369.htm> (accessed January 2010).
Ordóñez de Pablos, P. (2002). Knowledge management and organizational learning:
Typologies of generic knowledge strategies in the Spanish manufacturing
industry from 1995 to 1999. Journal of Knowledge Management, 6(1), 52–62.
Politou, E. A., Pavlidis, G. P., & Chamzas, C. (2004). JPEG2000 and the dissemination
of Cultural Heritage databases over the Internet. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 13(3), 293–301.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants – A new way to look at
ourselves and our kids. On the horizon (Vol. 9(5)). <http://www.marcprensky.
com/writing/Prensky%20-%20Digital%20Natives,%20Digital%20Immigrants%20%20Part1.pdf> (accessed January 2010).
Rodriguez Pérez, J. M., & Ordóñez de Pablos, P. (2003). Knowledge management and
organizational competitiveness: A framework for human capital analysis.
Journal of Knowledge Management, 7(3), 82–91.

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

M. Ott, F. Pozzi / Computers in Human Behavior xxx (2010) xxx–xxx
Roussou, M. (2002). Virtual heritage: From the research lab to the broad public. In
Proceedings of the VAST Euroconference. <http://makebelieve.gr/mr/research/
papers/VAST/VAST_00/mroussou_VAST00_press.pdf>
(accessed
January
2010).
Ruiz, B., Solano, J., Moreno, L., & Pajares, J. L. (2008). Mobile and accessible ICTs for
museography. Emerging Technologies and Information Systems for the Knowledge
Society – Lectures Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 5288, 531–539.
Sefton-Green, J. (2004). Informal learning with technology outside school. Bristol:
Futurelab.
Sigala, M. (2007). Integrating web 2.0 in e-learning environments: A sociotechnical approach. International Journal of Knowledge and Learning, 3(6),
628–648.
Twining, P. (2005). Discussing ICT, aspirations and targets for education:
International perspectives. International Journal of Knowledge and Learning,
3(2/3), 154–170.

7

UNESCO (2005). Information and communication technologies in schools – A handbook
for teachers. <http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001390/139028e.pdf>
(accessed January 2010).
Van der Leeuw-Roord, J. (2005). Heritage and history education at schools. In
Proceedings of The Europa nostra forum – Heritage and education: A European
perspective (pp. 39–41). The Hague.
Vargas-Vera, M., & Lytras, M. D. (2008). Exploiting semantic web and ontologies for
personalised learning services: Towards semantic web-enabled learning portals
for real learning experiences. International Journal of Knowledge and Learning,
4(1), 1–17.
Veltman, K. H. (2005). Challenges for ICT/UCT applications in Cultural Heritage. In C.
Carreras (Ed.). ICT and heritage. <ttp://www.uoc.edu/digithum/7/dt/eng/
dossier.pdf> (accessed January 2010).
Vygotsky, L. (1962). Thought and language (Hanfman, E. & Backer, G., Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press (Originally published in 1934).

Please cite this article in press as: Ott, M., & Pozzi, F. Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussing the role of ICT. Computers in Human
Behavior (2010), doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.07.031

