Преглед НЦД 27 (2015), 43–51

Dušan Tatić, Miloš Stošić,
Đorđe Manoilov, Radomir Stanković
Faculty of Electronic Engineering, University of Niš

UNIVERSAL MOBILE CULTURAL HERITAGE GUIDE BASED ON
ANDROID TECHNOLOGY
Abstract. This paper presents a universal mobile cultural heritage guide based on Android technology
that can help visitors of various exhibitions to browse multimedia information content with mobile
devices. The system consists of several independent programming modules that can be combined in
different ways to create various mobile applications for presenting cultural heritage. In this way, we
ensure universality of the guide and its applicability to different exhibition scenarios. A special module
for augmented reality technology is implemented to provide a possibility for presentation of 3D computer
generated reconstructions of objects at historical sites using either the location based or vision based
techniques. The system is verified on the example of an application for the Archaeological park Mediana
in Niš, Serbia.
Keywords. Handheld system, multimedia, augmented reality, tourist guide, cultural heritage

1. Introduction
Rapid growth of information technology and wide usage of mobile devices increase
expectations of visitors of museums, archaeological sites, and places organizing and
hosting other similar exhibitions. Visitors expect to have due to the advent of
technology a possibility to get more information about objects at the exhibition
according to their own interest. Printed schemas and textual panels or booklets cannot
keep up anymore with the demands of contemporary museum visitors. Therefore,
cultural institutions have to advance their exhibitions from a passive viewing of
predefined, selected, and necessarily limited amount of information to various dynamic
forms by using digital multimedia technologies and mobile platforms.
Therefore, there is a need to create attractive systems and innovative
applications in order to attract visitors and enlarge the audiences. Creating a direct
interaction between a visitor and the exhibited objects of his particular interest becomes
an imperative task to make exhibitions more attractive and appealing to visit. This can
be done by using technologies of augmented reality (AR) allowing to combine the
picture of the real world captured by a camera, usually the camera of a mobile device,
with the virtual computer generated content [1].
Recently, mobile devices like smartphones and tablets become the standard
information interface for ordinary customers. These interaction devices are good
platforms to create applications for the presentation of cultural heritage. Such
applications can help visitors to walk through museums and inform themselves about
the selected items of cultural heritage according to their personal interests. Embedded
multimedia content in the form of audio and video records, 3D computer generated
objects, photos and text can be used to offer interesting and interactive scenarios in
order to display their digital collections.
In this paper, we present a cultural heritage mobile system based on the Android
technology. The system is created as a universal platform meaning that it can be adapted

44

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

to exhibitions of different kind in various cultural institutions. For the direct interaction
with the exhibition space, the system provides a special module based on augmented
reality technologies.
1.1 Related work. There have been many approaches about virtual heritage projects
using mobile augmented reality. In this section, we briefly present three of them to
illustrate former, recent, and present approaches to mobile AR implementations
primarily intended for representing cultural heritage and enhancement of museum
exhibitions.
Archeoguide was among the first mobile systems of this kind [2]. In this system,
a rather robust equipment (Head-mounted display (HMD) and a computer in a
backpack) was used to communicate with central server and to present multimedia
content. This project was tested in Olympia with the purpose to show virtual
reconstructions of scenes of life in ancient Greece.
Recently, Ultra Mobile Personal Computer (UMPC) devices became more
popular for realizations of AR systems. For example, the AR-museum guide presented in
[3] uses these devices to guide visitors and inform them about the objects in the Louvre
museum. The AR technologies are used to navigate visitors along a specific route. Also,
the authors of the project created a Presentation room where visitors can get, by
scanning the object, additional information about artwork in their surroundings.
Nowadays, the Natural History Museum in London created the Augmented
reality arena to explore the complex theory of evolution [4]. They have combined
classical film projection technology with custom made handheld augmented reality
system to show new interactive experience. Handheld devices are used to track led
diodes at the center of the arena so that visitor can see extinct creatures moving at that
place.
The system presented in this paper takes into account that exhibition at an
archaeological site usually consists of an in-door and an out-door part. Typically, there
is an exhibition room to show various size artefacts, ranging from relatively large, such
as parts of statues, arms, pottery, etc., to small as for example jewelry, coins, and picks
of arrows, and similar objects. Ruins, remaining of buildings, fortifications, temples,
etc., make the out-door part of the exhibition to visit. Therefore, the system for
applications at archaeological site has to provide a good flexibility to meet different
demands for in-door and out-door exhibitions at the same time.
2. Functionality of the proposed system
Functionality of the system is determined by the intended applications and can be split
into three parts:
1. Navigation,
2. Information Provider,
3. Storytelling.
In the Navigation part, due to the link with Google Maps, the system enables to
locate the museum or the archaeological site, and determines the route to it in the
standard Google Maps manner. Typically, the system is configured such that the route
can be determined from the current position of the visitor, from the bus station, train
station, airport, or the harbor.
Information provider is intended to show the basic information about the
museum, such as, for example, working hours, exhibitions, prices, souvenir and book
shops catalog, other facilities, etc. These two functional units make the system suitable

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

45

as the general purpose touristic guide enabling a visitor to navigate across a city,
touristic resort, or an exhibition hall of a fair.
The Storytelling part, due to the connection with the purposely design
repository, is intended to provide detailed information about the objects and various
artifacts in the museum or similar other venues. The repository might contain textual,
audio, and video records, as well as photos and 3D models of objects and other artifacts.
An especially designed module offers the features of the augmented reality systems by
allowing inserting computer generated contents into the real scene captured by the video
camera of the underlined mobile device. The options of location-based tracking and
marker- or image-based tracking are provided. This feature is especially convenient for
archaeological sites, since allows augmenting the real scene with missing parts or whole
objects. It is also convenient in situations where, due to the conservation reasons, the
objects, such as mosaics, reliefs, or paintings, are not directly observable. In this case,
the system project the corresponding photos, paintings or drawings, videos, or 3D
reconstructions, enriched with underlying sound, speech or music, and textual data and
explanations.
3. System description and architecture
The architecture of the proposed system is organized in three subsystems: Design,
Logic, and Multimedia content. In this way, we follow the good practice similar to
Model View Controller (MVC) concept although this is not a property strongly featured
in Android programming environment. This organization into subsystems provides
flexibility and adaptability of the application to various scenarios as will be explained
below. Figure 1 shows the architecture of the system.
The subsystem Design is intended to provide necessary layout for the visitor
with an intuitively clear interface and the application determined navigation commands.
The layout is determined by the museum (or other customer) and it is a characteristic
trademark of a particular customer that can be distinguished from that of other
customers. Thus, it can be easily customer tailored, changed or modified without
interfering with other subsystems.
Logic is the core part of the system and ensures its functionality through several
modules that will be discussed in more details in the next section of the paper. This is
the invariant subsystem of the application independent of the customer.
Multimedia content is the subsystem that consists of a custom specific repository
with textual, audio and video records, photos, 2D and 3D objects. This content is
designed for each application separately according to the interest of the customer. The
data are provided in a large set of various contemporary used formats so that the base
can be filled in without much troubles whatever the formats provided by the customer
are. The system ensures a great flexibility in terms of formats and screen resolutions,
orientation (portrait or landscape) and sizes of screens of mobile devices.
Modules in the subsystem Logic. The subsystem Logic consists of several modules:
Map, List, Info and Augmented Reality.
Module Map is created to show the area of an archeological site or museum. It is
implemented with Google maps Application Programming Interface (API) and uses
orientation and directions functions from this API. These functions help to locate the
current position of the museum or a part of the archeological site on the map. This
enables to calculate and show the routes between points of interests and the current
position of the visitor, bus, or train station. The point of interest is also interactive and
provides more information about the selected place by calling the module Info. All

46

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

directions and media information are defined with Extensible Markup Language (XML)
for a faster content embedding.

Figure 1. Description of the system

Module Info is constructed to show more information about every object defined
in other modules. The module consists of five multimedia components:
1) Photo gallery - displays all images about the object,
2) Text area – show textual explanation for the object,
3) Audio player - read written text from text area,
4) Video player - plays video records if provided,
5) 3D model viewer – enable interaction (scale, rotation) with 3D models of objects.
Module List is generated to show the list of object and findings selected by
following some specific criteria unique for each particular museum or archaeological
park. Basic text and relevant photos are shown in the list of items which is defined as an
XML file that stores all relevant data. Interaction with this content enables to get more
multimedia information.
In the module Augmented reality, we use the augmented reality (AR) technology
that combine images of the real world and virtual computer generated images and 3D
models on the used mobile device display [5]. In this way, the virtual content looks as a
part of the real world. The other basic characteristics of augmented reality are that it
runs interactively and in real time and precisely aligns real and virtual objects with each
other [6]. This should help a visitor to easier imagine and visualize the missing parts or
whole objects. We use this technology to widen the visitor’s perception of the cultural
heritage sites augmented by the additional information. We decided to use Metaio
mobile SDK [7] for the implementation of AR, because it supports various types of
augmented reality tracking, both vision and location based.
The vision based technology uses the camera of mobile device to recognize parts
of the real world. The object of identification could be either marked places or parts of
real objects. Using the features of the recognized object, virtual content is registered in
the 3D space. We use two types of markers or natural features for tracking. Natural
feature tracking (NFT) is good for artifacts or their parts. The demands are that objects
need to have characteristic suitable for a reliable tracking. For more details about those
characteristics we refer to [8]. If objects do not have characteristics sufficiently good for

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

47

tracking, we use artificial markers for the recognition [9]. This kind of tracking is faster
and it can recognize more object than NFT. The bottleneck of the usage of artificial
markers is that the mystical effect characteristic for augmentation is reduced compared
to that usually produced by NFT.
Location based tracking deals with sensors like GPS, gyroscope, and
accelerometer. The virtual content is positioned based on data obtained from sensors
mixed with picture of visitors surrounding gained from the camera of the mobile device.
We use this type of augmented reality, except orientation in space, to project distant
objects or these on locations hardly accessible for the visitors. The interaction with
points of interest is implemented and connected with the module Info. These points of
interest could be in the form of 2D or 3D data.
In this module, we also implemented an application for recognition of QR codes.
This is useful since allows visitors to get more information about objects in the
exhibition. Recognition of QR code transfers us directly to the Info module.
Multimedia content. Multimedia content require a special preparation for mobile
devices. Because of that, generated 3D models have a low number of polygons (about
1000 to 4000 polygons) in fbx or obj format. For creation of 3D content, we used
specialized software tools for modeling, such as Autodesk 3ds Max, ZBrush, Cinema
4D, etc. Also, low cost 3D scanning was included (123d Catch, Kinect fusion, and
David Laserscanner) to make models for our system.
Audio materials are prepared in mp3 with 44.1 kHz bitrate 64 kbps because only
narrative voice was recorded. Video is done in mp4 with the h264 codec in the format
720 × 480 pixels and bitrate 768 kbps. We did the video editing with different software
tools like Adobe Aftereffects. All multimedia content is connected with an application
using XML. Simple changes of design and content trough XML files make system easy
to adjust application to different museums or archaeological sites which ensure its
universal applicability.
Design. The application is designed with a large flexibility and extensive possibilities
for adaptation to different cultural institutions. Defined trough the Android, the XML
layouts are prepared for different screens (Smartphone or tablet PC) resolution. Also,
design created in this way enable us to make applications tailored either for the end
users (visitors) or experts in the field working in the museums (as a tourist guide,
custos, etc.).
4. System implementation
The system is designed so that can be easily adapted to requirements by any museum or
archeological site by using the integrated modules. The modules could be enabled or
disabled depending on the requests for each concrete museum application. Visual
interface is easy to change for every application without affecting the logic of the
system. We created several applications for the museums and historical monuments in
the city of Niš (Mediana, Ćele-kula, Čegar, Niška tvrđava) by using the proposed
system. We will describe the implementation of the system on the example of the
application developed for the archaeological site Mediana. In this application all
modules and options of the proposed system are integrated.
Application is designed according to the requirements specified by experts for
the archeological site Mediana. It offers to a visitor possibilities to choose, depending
on his affinities and available time, information about the objects at the places where
they once existed and at exact locations. Viewing the information about objects or other

48

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

archaeological artifacts is done on the mobile device by using multimedia technologies.
In this way, it is possible to upgrade objects at the archaeological site that are protected
and cannot be seen or do not presently exist and whose physical reconstruction is
complex or impossible.
Main screen shows the links of four main categories info, map, objects, findings,
and augmented reality (Figure 2). The created application is multilingual and visitors
can choose one of languages (Serbian or English).

Figure 2. Main screen of the AR Mediana application

Category map shows the areal map of Mediana (Figure 3). It is created with the
module Map. This module has interactive pins (hotspots) which show important points
at the archeological site. Each interactive pin gives us ability to get more information
about the place. Also, the implemented route option gives to a visitor the opportunity to
see the road to the archeological site from the current location, city center, bus or train
stations.

Figure 3. Area of the archeological site Mediana (left) and
the road from the current location (right)

All data are defined in the XML where we store the information. More
information about hotspots is accessible through the category more info in the form of a
text and image gallery (Figure 4). Video and audio can be displayed about object of
interest. Also, the interaction with 3D models is possible as an option. All this is
implemented by using the module Info.

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

49

Figure 4. Information about an object, gallery, text, audio (left) and 3D model (right)

In categories findings and objects we used the module list (Figure 5). The
category Objects shows the list of all buildings and civil engineering constructions on
the archeological site (summer palace, horreum, military barracks, etc.). Movable
materials are shown in the category Findings (bronze gait, coins, statues, etc.). This is
organized as items that have small pictures and text information. If desired, more
information about items can be obtained through a further interaction with the device.
More detailed description of items in findings and objects can be obtained from the
category more info.

Figure 5. Lists of findings (left) and objects (right)

Category augmented reality, divided in subcategories (Reconstruction,
Orientation, and QR Scan), is created with the AR module. Subcategory Reconstruction
is used to recognize the parts of the archeological site and perform their reconstruction
with AR technologies. First problem we had to solve was to show mosaics which are
protected and hidden under the sand for the conservation reasons. We place the markers
at the corresponding places located across the archeological site. When a visitor directs
the camera of the mobile device towards a marker, he gets the real world image
augmented with the virtual image of the mosaics (Figure 6). The second problem was to
do the reconstruction of missing objects. Along the accessible paths of the archeological
site, there are archaeological ruins of few buildings. Placing the markers near the ruins,

50

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

the visitors can see through their devices the reconstruction of the buildings inserted in
the image of the current surrounding. The interaction with the computer generated
content is enabled and provides more information. The information we get through the
links with the Info category, in the form of audio, video, text, images etc.

Figure 6. Augmented Reality marker (left) and location based (right) tracking

The Orientation subcategory is used to show objects in the visitors surrounding
with location based augmented reality methods (Figure 6). Because Mediana is a large
site (40ha) we are able to show to visitors far away points of interest in the form of
floating balloons which show the image, name, and direction of the object based on
GPS data. These points of interest provide more information when visitor interact with
them. Information is linked with the category Info and provides all options for the
selected object.
Category QR Scan is used for the objects marked with the QR code inside
museums. Recognized QR code is liked with the more info category where visitors can
find more information.
5. Conclusion
Contemporary information technologies offer a lot of opportunities for various
applications in digitalization and presentation of different forms of national heritage.
This however imposes many challenges in determining how these opportunities can be
used in the most appropriate way with respect to the rigorous demands on preserving
and proper presenting items of national heritage, and at the same time to provide the
most informative and attractive exhibitions. The related applications have to be
inexpensive and it this way accessible for many visitors of exhibitions. Taking these
observations as a motivation, in this paper, we present a universal mobile guide based
on Android technology.
The term universal refers to two features of this system. First, it can be run on
different mobile platforms such as tablets and smart phones, which make it easily
affordable for many ordinary visitors of exhibitions of national heritage. Second, after
certain modifications, that are simple and easy to make, the same device can be adapted
to different kind of exhibitions, ranging from touristic guides across cities, through outdoor exhibitions at archaeological parks, to closed space museum exhibitions and fairs.
The architecture of the guide is organized into functional subsystems which
makes it adaptable to different application scenarios. In all applications, the core part of
the guide, the logic of the system, remain unchanged. The required modifications are

D. Tatić, M. Stošić, Đ. Manoilov, R. Stanković

51

done on the layout and data repository as specified by the customer. All functionalities
usually provided by the Android technology based devices are implemented. Due to this
the visitor can display various types of multimedia files.
The application is further enriched with an especially designed module that
enables the augmented reality option, which allows displaying virtual reconstruction of
different objects embedded in the real environment. The proposed solution was tested
and verified by a concrete application developed for the Archeological park Mediana in
the City of Niš, Serbia.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the reviewers who provided constructive comments for
improving the presentation in this paper.
The work presented in this paper was supported by the Serbian Ministry of
Education and Science (project III 044006).
References
[1] Sparacino, Flavia, The Museum Wearable: Real-Time Sensor-Driven Understanding of
Visitors' Interests for Personalized Visually-Augmented Museum Experiences, Proceedings of
Museums and the Web, 2002.
[2] Vlahakis, Vassilios, M. Ioannidis, John Karigiannis, Manolis Tsotros, Michael Gounaris,
Didier Stricker, Tim Gleue, Patrick Daehne, and Luís Almeida, Archeoguide: An augmented
reality guide for archaeological sites, Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE 22, 5 (2002),
52–60.
[3] Miyashita, Tsutomu, P. Meier, Tomoya Tachikawa, Stephanie Orlic, Tobias Eble, Volker
Scholz, Andreas Gapel, Oliver Gerl, Stanimir Arnaudov, and Sebastian Lieberknecht, An
augmented reality museum guide, Proc. 7th IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. on Mixed and Augmented
Reality, IEEE Computer Society, 2008, 103–106
[4] Barry, Ailsa, Graham Thomas, Paul Debenham, and Jonathan Trout, Augmented reality in a
public space: The Natural History Museum, London, Computer 45: 7(2012), 42–47.
[5] Carmigniani, Julie, Borko Furht, Marco Anisetti, Paolo Ceravolo, Ernesto Damiani, and
Misa Ivkovic, Augmented reality technologies, systems and applications, Multimedia Tools and
Applications, 51:1(2011), 341–377.
[6] Azuma, Ronald T., A survey of augmented reality, Presence Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 6:4(1997), 355–385.
[7] Metaio Mobile SDK, http://www.metaio.com/products/sdk/, January 2014.
[8] Herling, Jan, and Wolfgang Broll, Markerless Tracking for Augmented Reality, Handbook of
Augmented Reality, Springer New York, 2011, 255–272
[9] Kato, Hirokazu, and Mark Billinghurst, Marker tracking and hmd calibration for a videobased augmented reality conferencing system, Proc.2nd IEEE and ACM International
Workshop on Augmented Reality (IWAR'99), 1999, 85–94.

dule_tatic@yahoo.com
milosstosic88@gmail.com
manoilov88@gmail.com
radomir.stankovic@gmail.com

