PLEA2006 – The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Geneva, Switzerland, 6-8 September 2006

Visitors’ Center in Archeological Sites – an
architectural approach to the sustainable use
Ghetti Neuvânia C.; Martins Angela M. M.;
Krause Claudia B.; Bastos Leopoldo E. G.
Architecture and Urbanism College, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

ABSTRACT: To recognize the importance of the sustainability questions (environmental quality)
applied to the edified areas matters, must be the central point in planning actions, including all the
values and particularities, especially in those that have tourist interest.
The determination of the priorities, involving the enterprise environmental quality, considering the
environmental, sanitary and comfort characteristics, is the theoretical basis to conduct the
construction and its phases, such as programming, project and execution.
Besides, it must be considered the Charge Capacity concept, leading to preventive actions
promoting an adequate environmental use profile to guide the exploration of the place.
The methodology proposed in this paper is the HQE (Environmental High Quality) approach,
studying the relation of the building (it’s construction, use and operation) with the sensible
neighborhood, the sanitary conditions and the user’s comfort, including the visitors.
This paper aims to a reflection about the use planning in high sensible places that include historic
heritage and which importance is improved by tourist and ecological values, such as the
archeological sites, keeping as guide and reference the environmental characteristics, considered in
the HQE approach.
Keywords: Sustainability, HQE, Heritage.

1. INTRODUCTION
The archeological material signs left by the
ancient societies to the modern world stimulate the
interest of visitors in historical and pre-historical sites
all over the world. This interest satisfies the people’s
needs in having the living contact with the material
evidences of their own past.
Besides, the visits are made, also, with the aim to
increase the knowledge about the ancestral material
culture, as to elucidate the visitor about the heritage
and the environmental preservation of the site. The
archeological sites are indeed, often investigated by
the most different researchers such as sociologists,
anthropologists archeologists, historians, architects,
chemistries, and others.
Nowadays, Brazil has about 8.000 archeological
sites registered in the IPHAN (National Institute for
the Historic and Artistic Heritage). Some of these
were created by consecutive human occupation along
the history and by the material residues of fire, litho
and bone artifacts, cave paints and human
cemeteries of the ancient groups formed by hunters,
collectors, fishers, and producing “super-artifacts” like
foundations and others built elements.
So, the preoccupation about the public exhibition
process of the archeological heritage grows, making
necessary to think about the use in these high

sensible places, which importance is amplified by
tourist and ecological value.
This paper aims to reflect about the applicability of
the HQE (Environmental High Quality) approach, in
the installation of
Visitor’s Centers in special
archeological interest area – the archeological sites,
with an approach that includes the environmental
characteristics applied in projects compromised with
the user’s and visitor’s environmental, sanitary and
comfort qualities.

2.
TOURISM,
HERITAGE
SUSTAINABLE USE

AND

THE

2.1 The Tourism and Heritage question
In these days, the tourism is an important
academic, governmental, industrial and public area.
Although it is public that the tourism is the biggest
economic activity in the world, the tourism is
important not only because of the dimension involving
the travelers, the creation of employs and the
economic factors, but also by the great impact that
produces in the visited places and in the people life,
and in the way that it is very affected by the
surrounding ambient (HALL, 2004).
According to the WTO (World Tourism
Organization) it is clear that is necessary to satisfy
some essential conditions, among which can be
pointed the investment in the local environment and

PLEA2006 – The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Geneva, Switzerland, 6-8 September 2006

heritage valorization, eliminating the damage
practices and stimulating the preservation and
protection actions. The growing tourism makes these
aspects very important and an essential condition to
the development.
In this context, the tourism has showed greater
tendencies inside the tourist planning traditions,
because it happens in different manners, through the
infrastructure development, the use of the earth and
resources, the organization, the human resources
and the marketing. It also includes structures like
governments, governmental and non governmental
organizations
in
different
scales,
nationals,
internationals, transnationals, regional and local ones
in all the phases of the planning action such as
research, implementation, evaluation and the
satisfactory execution of the purposes. So, the tourist
planning actions must be strategic and integrate,
avoiding the negative impacts and being efficient.
The tourism is plural, involving social, economics
and physics dimensions. Thinking in the factors that
form the sustainability – economic development,
socio-cultural criteria and environmental quality, it is
important and vital to put together the environmental
and the architectonic preoccupations, in the moment
that it is need to act in a place that shows historic,
cultural and tourist values. The tourist activity
conducts to an increase of the tourist destinies use
capacities, in many times exposing historical and
cultural high value sensible and fragile places.
2.2 Special archeological interest area
The archeological sites generally are situated in
protection area, like municipal, state or federal parks
or in ecological conservation unities. In some cases,
they can be located in private proprieties. At all these
situations, the correct approach to the use planning is
conduced considering the local aspects including the
cultural, physics, ecological and social-economics
ones.
In face of each archeological site sensibility and
fragility, the intense impacts produced by the tourist
visitation on the natural and archeological heritage, it
is important to characterize the principal site access
paths in all the aspects physics, ecologic and
environmental, divulgating the zoning politics included
in the Management Plan and Tourist Development
Program to the area.
So, it is necessary to know the area historic data,
situating them and pointing the area creating process
included in the archeological site. It is also necessary
to have the soil, vegetation and fauna data of the
area, in order to view the environmental problems
caused by the different ways of use and accesses to
the archeological site.
2.3 The sustainable use
The sustainable development can provide the
tourist activity implementation and, in many cases,
generate jobs and capital, creating motivation to set
up new constructed unities, new infrastructure,
providing new actions and interventions on the natural
environment itself, and also, many times, on the built
environment.

The sustainable use needs a continuous wellbeing in the dimension of the social and physics
environment and the interpretation of the use must
also have continuous and constant re-evaluations in
order to create future conservation actions to protect
the environment / building.
Pollution relative questions, in all the proportions
and ways, environmental degradation and natural or
constructed heritage destruction matters may set the
new project development models, which will consider
the structural transformations occurred due to the
environmental reasons.
Nowadays, the tourist routs depends on the
existence of an expressive constructed apparatus and
on the necessary infrastructure in order to the visitor
experience may go on.
Bad planning equipments, disrespecting the
natural limits and potentialities, no programming in
the visitor welcome center conception, in many times,
generate the visitor lack of interest in making the
living experience on more original situations about the
visited place.
So, it is necessary to make the rupture with a
restricted view in the architectural questions on
projects and on the architectonic objects and urban
spaces preservation actions. The sustainable
development perception recognizes that an
environmental and ecological mistake in the
architectonical and urban spaces projects is the mark
point to the beginning of intense discussions about
ideas and concepts.
The maturation in the relationship architecture and
sustainability
indicate
particular
participation
strategies among different disciplines and dimensions
and their inter-relations, getting the objectives of the
local development and the edified environment
quality, inside a tourist space.
There is the need about to develop mechanisms
to make possible the articulation and the data,
information and responsibilities sharing between the
intervention managers and planners, such as the
cumulate intrinsic knowledge systemizing, and the
strategic application in the programming process
leading to effective actions since the projects
conception.
In the idea that the use must be conducted to not
exceed the natural or constructed environmental
capacity and not exhaust or destruct it, it is necessary
to understand the limits within which the environment
accepts the transformations. This means that it must
be done judgments about the resource and
environment ability to accept the needs, without
irreversible, unacceptable and damage looses.
According to the realized Visitor’s Center
implementation process, it will be possible to make
the control and the visiting flux management, defining
the time and space balance to the visit and/ or the
visitor standing in the archeological site and its
surroundings.
This approach will directly affect the visitors’
actions prevision providing a more efficient analysis
about the resources and rules to these places
preservation and protection considering since the
simplest touch until the conservation intervention
material quality control.

PLEA2006 – The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Geneva, Switzerland, 6-8 September 2006

3. HQE (ENVIRONMENTAL HIGH QUALITY)
APPROACH AND THE RELATION WITH
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SPECIAL
INTEREST
AREAS
The HQE approach is a derivation of the
Sustainable Architecture idea, and consider in the
development:
•
the economic sustainability, proposing the
efficient resources use (labor, materials,
water and energy quality and management);
•
the environmental sustainability that defines
the careful use of the natural resources
minimizing the wastes, and the environment
protection and improvement; and
•
the social sustainability that consider the
different “social actors” needs, specially those
involved in the construction process (form the
planning to the demolition phases), the client
high
satisfaction,
the
environmental
compromises and the local community.
This approach allows the constructive process to
integrate a new value – the environmental value – in
the global process conception, where the architectural
and environmental questions must have a multicriteria view.
A very important aspect is that this approach must
begin soon, in the initial process phase and includes
three stages: Programming – Project – Conception.
There is a consonance among the HQE process
environmental category preoccupation and those
included in ISO 14001 normative series, but the HQE
approach does not concerns to the enterpriser
organization, but with the enterprise itself, bringing
the “environmental performance” notion clearly and
widely, because it takes in importance the sanitary
aspects and the building users’ comfort.
The starting point to the definition and evaluation
of the buildings environmental quality, according to
the HQE approach, is defined by means of an
environmental profile, defined n the 14 categories: the
environmental, sanitary and comfort preoccupation
targets.
In the exterior environment designed Ecoconstruction, there are:
1) the building and surrounding relations;
2) the
integrate
product,
systems
and
constructive choices; and
3) the low impact construction area.
In the Eco-management, there are:
4) the energy management;
5) the water management;
6) the waste management; and
7) the maintenance management
In the interior environment, the building users’
comfort are identified in the:
8) hydrothermal comfort;
9) acoustic comfort;
10) visual comfort; and
11) smelling comfort.
In the building users’ health aspects, there are:
12) the environmental sanitary quality;

13) the air sanitary quality; and
14) the water sanitary quality.
The positive tourist action impacts such as the
regional and local economic diversification, the
enterprises creation, the population fixation in the
interior area, the basic infrastructure improvement
(sanitary and transport systems) and the equipment
improvement in protected sites, must be indicated as
prominent points to the local development.
In this way there is the preoccupation with the built
installations, respecting the natural and historic
environmental limits, defining the low impact projects
that, indeed, amplify the tourist satisfaction and that
can be capable to promote a bigger comprehension
about the current natural and cultural-historic
systems.
These projects have the nature as the inspiration
and must be adapted to it, conducing the tourist to an
experience that will “give him the feeling that the visit
is something beyond the usual, a precious opportunity
to learn, give importance and feel the world.”
(CIFUENTES, apud SEABRA, 1999).
In the tourist activity planning, the researcher can
make recommendations about the building projects,
the energetic resources use, the solid waste
treatment and the available infrastructure, with the
aim of getting the sustainability. So, it is necessary
an approach that includes the environmental
excellence and the users’ comfort.
3.1 The HQE approach application on Archeological
Special Interest Area Visitors’ Center projects.
In the HQE process approach, this paper
proposition will be conduced considering the
environmental preoccupation categories, with the aim
to give theoretical subsidies to delineate and support
the programming, the conception and the
implementation project, to the increase or to the
modification of a Visitors’ Center.
In the exterior environment will be studied the
targets relative to Eco-construction and Ecomanagement.
In the interior environment it will be considered the
objectives relative to the users’ comfort and health.
Exterior Environment
1 – Eco-construction
a) Relation building and surroundings – it must be
considered the advantages and disadvantages in the
sensible context to be possible the definition about
the project morphology, its functional and
architectonical organization, according to the
archeological site.
b) Integrate choice of products, systems and
constructive processes – it is important to respect the
right choice of the products that will be incorporated
to the building, so the use of systems dedicated to the
enterprise time long and adaptability and, according
to the constructive processes, the preoccupation must
be directed to the environmental impacts during the
expected cycle of life.
c) Construction area – it is necessary that the
programming include the use of low environmental
impact constructions areas, with the purpose of

PLEA2006 – The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Geneva, Switzerland, 6-8 September 2006

minimizing the caused
surroundings. The waste
and its management
discomfort and pollution
must be avoided.

damages in the site or
production must be reduced
shall be optimized. The
caused by the construction

2 – Eco-management
a) Water management – in these cases, it is
important to consider the use of artesian water well
up resources, which must be evaluated about the
human drinking qualities and in relation to the water
reutilization.
b) Waste management - the preoccupation about
the interior and exterior waste collect must be
present, such as the waste treatment, including the
setting up of collect recipients in adequate quantity.
c) Maintenance management – it is necessary to
recognize the importance about the stability on the
environmental and sanitary performance, simplifying
the maintenance and cleaning, by an easy access to
the energy, water and waste housing. These places’
conception must be based in the uncomplicated use,
guaranteeing an easy component replacement and
reducing the users’ discomforts.
Interior environment
1 – Comfort
a) Hydrothermal comfort – the enterprise must
have a preview about the users’ hydrothermal comfort
aspects, especially considering the regional climatic
characteristics, and so the possibilities in the tourist
use increasing.
In not air-conditioned rooms, the thermal comfort
must be searched, letting the user to control the
temperature as his wishes, by opening or closing
windows.
In the air-conditioned rooms, it must be defined a
specific ventilation system, getting the temperature
adequate level in the different accommodations when
in use and according to the type of the use. The users
shall control the air speed and thermal characteristics.
The solar incidence must be considered, controlling,
as much as possible, the environmental solar heat
discomfort.
b) Acoustic comfort – a good environmental
acoustic comfort must be obtained by the adoption of
architectural and spatial arrangements, keeping these
characteristics to the neighborhood and in the rooms’
interrelations.
c) Visual comfort – the natural and artificial
illumination in the interior and exterior areas must be
cared, guaranteeing good luminosity uniformity, with
comfort and the control possibility to the users.
d) Smelling comfort – the building characteristics
must be adequate to permit effective ventilation, in
order to avoid unpleasant odors, mainly in the near
bathrooms areas.
2 – Users’ health aspects
a) Environmental sanitary quality – in the
situations where are necessary to be present
bathrooms and kitchens and also when it must be
given drinkable water to the users, it is essential to
care about the water quality aspects, besides the

adequate hygienic conditions of the collective use
equipments.
The bathrooms and kitchens waste collect and
throw-outs must be studied with the purpose to avoid
eventual contamination on the natural water
resources.
b) Air sanitary quality – an adequate ventilation
must be searched, keeping the hygienic exigencies,
the necessary air renew and the flow control
possibility.
c) Water sanitary conditions – in the cases where
there is artesian well up water resource, it is important
to evaluate the type and the effectiveness of the
treatment, making possible the human consumption,
and guaranteeing that no contamination will affect the
water resource, that is kept isolate from the waste
collect and distribution system. The stocking of water
for a long time must be also avoided.

4 – FINAL COMMENTARY
Other aspects and considerations can be made
additionally to those above related. So, it can be
thought that:
•
as the archeological site is a fragile heritage,
special care must be taken about the indicative
signalizations aiming to the tourist – user
environmental education;
•
as the archeological site is an eco-tourist
place, it must be present particular worry to the site
access paths cleaning, as to the built elements
maintenance such as bridges and ways, avoiding the
generation of new environmental impact and
degradation points;
•
security questions, like the fire combat
preventive plan and the possibility on evacuation
emergency in accidents situations must be present in
the enterprise planning. Actions against vandalism
acts, avoiding damages to the heritage must also be
included;
•
individual security aspects (police, health
emergency, rescue and safe) must be included in the
planning. The medical assistance to the users and
visitors must also be provided;
•
the users’ participation must be stimulated
by the use of opinion formularies and questionnaires,
in order to evaluate the spaces and building comfort
level;
•
the sanitary quality aspects of the tourist
services are very important, particularly the water and
food quality controls;
•
the parking areas must be planned with the
purpose to not exceed the maximum tolerance limit
delimitated to the Visitors’ Center and even to the
archeological site; and
•
a rest area can be thought in the Visitors’
Center exterior, providing the contemplation and
nature enjoy possibility.
This paper’s Visitors’ Center enterprise suggestion
takes in view the environmental characteristics
according to the civil construction aspects (products,
planning, project, construction work) considering an
approach that aims to the environmental high quality

PLEA2006 – The 23rd Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Geneva, Switzerland, 6-8 September 2006

targets and considering, also, the sensibility of the
place and the tourist use in particular.
The tourism has to be linked to the conservation
and leisure and not to a conflictive use with negative
objectives and effects that produce the visitors’
discomfort and dissatisfaction.
With a correct planning stage and the installation
of the Visitors’ Center, many of the troubles described
in this research may be close to their solution or,
even, to their total elimination.
To recognize the importance of the sustainability
and architectonical questions, especially those
relative to the historic and cultural heritage or to the
tourist spaces, with all their particularities, must be
pointed as a new management pattern.
So, it is necessary to create and establish plenty
mechanisms to promote an adequate situation control
and evaluation, predicting future events and making
possible the cycle feedback for adjustments and
continuous improvement, in order to guarantee the
historic and cultural resource preservation and the
space quality in the visitors’ receiving processes.

5 - REFERENCES
ALMEIDA, J. et al. Planejamento ambiental. Rio de
Janeiro: Editora Thex, 1999.
BOULLÓN, R. C.
Planejamento do espaço
turístico. Bauru, SP: EDUSC, 2002.
CARDOSO, F. F. Certificação de empreendimento
comercial de elevado desempenho ambiental.
PCC, USP/CSTB. São Paulo, 2003.
CIFUENTES, M. Capacidad de carga turistica de la
áreas de uso público del Monumento Nacional
Guayabo, Costa Rica. WWF CATIE, 1999.
DEWAILLY, J. M., FLAMENT, E. Dossiers des
images économiques du monde. Paris:Sedes,
1993.
GEMAP Plano de Manejo para a visitação do sítio
arqueológico MS-MA-037, Aquidauana-MS. Anais
do XIII Congresso da SAB. Campo Grande, 2005.
HALL, C. M. Planejamento Turístico.Políticas,
processos e relacionamentos. São Paulo:
Contexto, 2001.
ICOMOS - Heritage e Tourism. Counterbury, UK. 27
– 30 março 1990.
MARRA, R. J. C. Espeleo Turismo – Planejamento
e manejo de cavernas. Brasília: Ed. WD Ambiental,
2001.
MELLO, C. C. do A. Capacidade de Suporte do
território. Rio de Janeiro, UFRJ/IPPUR, 1998. .
PORTUGUEZ, A. P. Consumo e Espaço – turismo,
lazer e outros temas. São Paulo: Ed. Roca, 2001.
RASMUSSEN, S. E. Arquitetura Vivenciada. São
Paulo: Martins Fontes, 1998.
RODRIGUES, A. A. B. (org.) Turismo e Geografia –
reflexões teóricas e enfoques regionais. 2ª Ed,
São Paulo: Ed. Hucitec,1999..
RUSCHMANN, D. Turismo e Planejamento
Sustentável: a proteção do meio ambiente.
Campinas: Ed. Papirus, 1997.
SEABRA, L. S. Determinação da capacidade de
carga turística para a trilha principal de acesso à
Cachoeira de Deus – Parque Municipal TurísticoEcológico de Penedo – Itatiaia – RJ. Dissertação
de Mestrado – UFF. Niterói, 1999.
SIMPSON, P. e WALL, G. Avaliação do impacto
ambiental para o turismo. In PEARCE, D. e
BUTTLER, R. (org.) Desenvolvimento em Turismo.
Temas contemporâneos. São Paulo: Contexto, 2000,
p.281/308.
STANLEY, C. P. Por que a preservação do destino
tem sentido econômico? In Turismo Global, Org.
THEOBALD, W. F. São Paulo: Ed. SENAC, 2002.
YÁZIGI E., CARLOS A. F. A., CRUZ R. C. A.
Turismo: espaço, paisagem e cultura. São Paulo:
Ed. Hucitec, 1996.

