Advanced Science and Technology Letters
Vol.112 (Architecture and Civil Engineering 2015), pp.46-49
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/astl.2015.112.09

A Review of Indoor Positioning Techniques
Jaegeol Yim1,1
1

Department of Computer Engineering, Dongguk University at Gyeongju,
Gyeongbuk, Korea
yim@dongguk.ac.kr

Abstract. Location-based services (LBS) provide useful information to users
based on the current user location or a given location. Therefore, one of the key
techniques for LBS development is positioning, or identifying the coordinate of
the spot where the user is currently located. For outdoor LBS, the GPS (Global
Positioning System) provides a general solution for positioning. However,
discovering a general solution for indoor positioning is still a hot research topic.
This paper reviews recently published indoor positioning techniques.
Keywords: Indoor Positioning, Location based Services, Global Positioning
System, Wi-Fi.

1

Introduction

Location-based services (LBS) provide useful information to users based on the
current user location or a given location. LBS include services of identifying locations
of persons or objects such as discovering the nearest subway station or the
whereabouts of friends or valuables. Vehicle navigation systems, logistic systems,
location-based target advertisement systems and coupon systems, and cabs
management systems are a few examples of practical LBS [1].
LBS cannot be realized unless a general solution for positioning, or identifying the
coordinate of the spot where the user is currently located, is available. For outdoor
LBS, the GPS (Global Positioning System) provides a general solution for positioning.
However, the indoor positioning problem is still open.
As manmade structures such as buildings and underground facilities are getting
larger and larger, a demand for indoor LBS is getting stronger and stronger. Campus
guides, museum guides, shopping helpers for department stores, and employee
management systems are under development in the indoor LBS field [2]. Therefore,
this paper reviews recently published indoor positioning techniques. In the early stage
of indoor LBS, they relied upon special devices for indoor positioning. Since the time
when the Internet was available everywhere, Wi-Fi based positioning methods have
1

This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-20110006942) and by the Dongguk University Research Fund of 2015.

ISSN: 2287-1233 ASTL
Copyright © 2015 SERSC

Advanced Science and Technology Letters
Vol.112 (Architecture and Civil Engineering 2015)

been hot research topics. Nowadays, many smartphone based indoor positioning
techniques can be found in the current literature.

2

Related Works

Villarrubia et al. [3] summarized existing indoor location technologies as follows:
- Infrared: The characteristics of infrared include "its short range" and "requiring a
line of sight." Therefore, indoor location with only infrared cannot be a general
solution of indoor positioning.
- Wi-Max: Wi-Max has the range of 50 km. This is too large scope for indoor
positioning.
- Bluetooth: The procedure of Bluetooth based positioning systems detects
Bluetooth devices, obtains received signal strength indications (RSSI), estimates
distances between the moving object and other Bluetooth devices, and estimates the
location of the moving object by applying a triangulation algorithm. The
disadvantages of Bluetooth based positioning include it requires many Bluetooth
devices and RSSI fluctuates too much.
- Ultra Wideband: This is accurate and reliable. However, its use is not guaranteed
by the law. That is, this cannot be used in some places.
- ZigBee: This is considered to be the most adequate technology for indoor
positioning. However, it has a very small bandwidth and cannot offer other services
such as streaming and Internet.
Villarrubia et al. [3] also summarized indoor localization algorithms.
- Direction of Arrival: With the angles of the line from at least three reference
points to the moving object, this algorithm estimates the position of the moving object
as deoicted in Figure 1.
r2
n2

r1
n1

m

n3
r3

Fig. 1. A diagram to illustrate the direction
of arrival method

Fig. 2. A diagram to illustrate trilateration

Trilateration: If we measure N ranges, r1 , r2 , ..., r N from N base stations, to a
mobile terminal as shown in Figure 2, then we can estimate the coordinates of the
moving object by using trilateration. In the figure, m represents the moving object
while n represents a reference node.

Copyright © 2015 SERSC

47

Advanced Science and Technology Letters
Vol.112 (Architecture and Civil Engineering 2015)

- Fingerprinting: This method records fingerprints of every interested points in the
domain. Given a fingerprint, it identifies the interested point that matches the
fingerprint. We use a set of sensor values collected at an interested point as the
fingerprint of the point.
- Multilateration: This method estimates distances between the moving object and
at least three reference points whose coordinates are known. With the distances and
the coordinates of the reference points, it determines the location of the moving object.
The purpose of [3] is developing a museum guide app. This app recognizes the
monumental work that the user is watching and plays a video content that is closely
related to it on the user's smartphone. The process of recognizing the monumental
work is follows: 1) It identifies the room where the user is located with Wi-Fi
technology. 2) The user takes a picture of the monumental work. 3) It performs the
image process to recognize the monumental work.
Poosamani and Rhee [4] pointed out the disadvantages of existing methods as
follows:
Most practical indoor location-based services use specialized devices and RF
signals or beacons.
Wi-Fi signal fingerprinting methods requires extensive calibration and deployment
overhead.
Indoor positioning using smartphone sensors consume too much battery energy of
the smartphones.
Indoor positioning using averaged received signal strength (RSS) of 2G cellular
signals is too rough because RSS is determined by too many factors.
Developing practical indoor positioning methods with already existing available
resources such as Wi-Fi and smartphone sensors is the main concern in the field of
indoor positioning. Poosamani and Rhee [4] proposed an indoor positioning system
that logically estimates user location referring to signal received quality (RSRQ) and
reference signal received power (RSRP) and other physical (PHY) layer information
from 4G cellular network signals. Their method is a kind of fingerprinting method.
However, their method does not require deployment overhead because they build
fingerprints in near real-time.
Rida et al. [5] designed and implemented a trilateration algorithm based on RSSI
of the Bluetooth low energy 4.0 (BLE) to determine user indoor location. Chen and
Lin [6] proposed a neural network for indoor positioning. They trained the neural
network with ZigBee link quality indicator.
Li et al. [7] reviewed techniques for RFID (radio frequency identification) based
indoor positioning. Near field communication (NFC) tag is Android version of RFID.
Android app developers can read NDEF (NFC data exchange format) data from NFC
tag using the tag dispatch system.
Lee and Yim [8] described a few Wi-Fi based indoor positioning systems. Two of
them built by the fingerprinting method: one used the K-nearest neighbor method and
the other used the decision tree method. They also described a Wi-Fi based indoor
positioning system built by the trilateration method. Then, they described the
extended Kalman filter process for Wi-Fi based indoor positioning.
Yim [9] introduced indoor positioning method that determines the user's current
position with the smart phone's sensor values. Referring to the accelerometer values,
this method counts steps. An example collection of Z axis accelerometer is shown in

48

Copyright © 2015 SERSC

Advanced Science and Technology Letters
Vol.112 (Architecture and Civil Engineering 2015)

Figure 3. With the orientation values, this method estimates the direction. With the
step count and the direction, this method determines the current location of the user.

Fig. 3. An example collection of Z axis accelerometer [9]

3

Conclusion

As the demand for indoor LBS is increasing, indoor positioning, one of the key
techniques for indoor LBS development has been hot research topic. However, a
general solution for indoor positioning has not been discovered, yet. This paper
reviewed recently published indoor positioning techniques. Discussed techniques will
helpful to indoor LBS developers.

References
1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LBS
2. Shim, K., Yim, J., Jeon, J.: Development of an Indoor-Outdoor Positioning Android App for
Anapji Tourist Guides. In: International Journal of Software Engineering and Its
Applications. Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 195-208, (2015)
3. Villarrubia, G., De Paz, J.F., De La Prieta, F., Bajo, J.: Hybrid indoor location system for
museum tourist routes in augmented reality. In: 17th International Conference on
Information Fusion (FUSION), pp.1-8, (2014)
4. Poosamani, N., Rhee, I.: Towards a practical indoor location matching system using 4G
LTE PHY layer information. In: IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing
and Communication Workshops, pp.284-287, (2015)
5. Rida, M.E., Liu, F., Jadi, Y., Algawhari, A., Askourih, A.: Indoor Location Position Based
on Bluetooth Signal Strength. In: 2nd International Conference on Information Science and
Control Engineering, pp. 769-773, (2015)
6. Chen, R., Lin, Y.: Using ZeeBee Sensor Network with artifical neural network for indoor
location. In: Eighth International Conference on Natural Computation, pp. 290-294, (2012)
7. Li, Z., Zhou, Z., He, C., Huang, X.: Advances in RFID-ILA: The past, present and future of
RFID-based indoor location algorithms. In: 24th Chinese Control and Decision Conference,
pp. 3830-3835, (2012)
8. Lee, G., Yim, J.: A Review of the Techniques for Indoor Location based Service. In: IJGDC
Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 1-22 (2012)
9. Yim, J,: A Smartphone Indoor Positioning Method. In: International Journal of Smart Home,
Vol.7, No.5, pp.9-18 (2013)

Copyright © 2015 SERSC

49

