See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263813268

06851448
Data · July 2014

CITATIONS

READS

0

123

4 authors:
A. Chianese

Fiammetta Marulli

University of Naples Federico II

Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli

41 PUBLICATIONS 515 CITATIONS

59 PUBLICATIONS 494 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Vincenzo Moscato

Francesco Piccialli

University of Naples Federico II

University of Naples Federico II

203 PUBLICATIONS 2,445 CITATIONS

152 PUBLICATIONS 2,030 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Video and image retrieval View project

ph.D Thesis View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Francesco Piccialli on 11 July 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

2013 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 28-31th October 2013
Workshop: Location-based services for Indoor Smart Environments

A “smart” multimedia guide for indoor contextual
navigation in Cultural Heritage applications
A. Chianese, F. Marulli, V. Moscato and F. Piccialli
Department of electrical engineering and information technologies
University of Naples “Federico II”, Italy
Email: {angchian, fiammetta.marulli, vmoscato, francesco.piccialli}@unina.it

Abstract—In this paper, we present an ongoing project
developed within DATABENC, a high technology district for
Cultural Heritage management. In particular, the project aims
at exploiting several location-based services and technologies to
realize a smart multimedia guide system able to detect user
position and make objects of a museum exhibition able to “talk”
during tourists’ visit and capable of automatically telling their
story using multimedia facilities. Moreover, we have deployed in
the museum rooms a particular Wireless Sensor Network (WSN)
that, using Bluetooth technology, is able to sense the surrounding
area for detecting user devices’ presence. Once a device has been
detected, the related MAC address is retrieved and multimedia
contents of the closest museum artworks are delivered to user
using proper multimedia delivery techniques to facilitate and
make more stimulating the visit. As case of study, we show an
example of ”talking” museum as a smart multimedia guide of
sculptures’ art exhibition within the Maschio Angioino castle, in
Naples (Italy).

I.

I NTRODUCTION

In the recent context of smart cities, the smartness requirements call for new intelligent services able to provide useful
information on the base of users location and preferences, as
well as, on the context usually captured by means a set of
sensors. An interesting technology for these environments is
by now known as Location-Based Services (LBS) that refers
to a class of applications integrating geographic location with
the general notion of services. In particular, indoor space is
becoming the main and attractive scene for designing novel
LBSs in ubiquitous and pervasive computing: indoor LBSs
need not only fundamental geo-information, but also special
location information interacted with users and surroundings to
understand physical world.
One of the fields that can take great advantages of such
technologies is the Cultural Heritage one. Indeed, it represents
a worldwide resource of inestimable value and such a value
gains more and more importance when embedded into the
digital ecosystem of a smart city, where persons (citizens,
tourists, etc.) and objects (buildings, rooms, artefacts, etc.)
equipped with appropriate devices (GPS, smart-phone, video
cameras, sensors, RFID and QR Code tags, etc.) constitute a
particular social network in which all the mentioned entities,
and more, can communicate. Exchanged and produced data
can be opportunely exploited by a set of applications in order
to make the system “smart”, and from a more general point
of view, the social network can be seen as composed of a set
of Single Smart Spaces - S 3 (indoor museums, archeological
sites, old town center, etc...), each needing particular ICT

978-1-4799-4043-1/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

infrastructures and services that transform the physical spaces
into useful smart environments [1]. In such a context, one of
the most important issue is to design location-based services
that can assist tourists in the contextual navigation of an indoor
S 3 , for example automatically delivering to users multimedia
contents related to the museum artworks on the base of
their positions. In this paper, we describe an ongoing project
developed within DATABENC 1 , a High Technology District
for Cultural Heritage management recently funded by Regione
Campania - Italy. In particular, the project aims at exploiting
several location-based services technologies to realize a smart
guide able to detect user position and make objects of a
museum exhibition able to “talk” during tourists’ visit and
capable of automatically telling their story using multimedia
facilities. In particular, we have deployed a particular Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN) that, using Bluetooth technology, is
able to sense the surrounding area for detecting user devices’
presence. Once a device has been detected, the related MAC
address is retrieved and a multimedia story of the closest
museum objects is delivered to user using proper multimedia
delivery techniques to facilitate and make more stimulating the
visit. Finally, we show an example of ”talking” museum as a
smart multimedia guide of sculptures’ art exhibition within the
Maschio Angioino castle, in Naples - Italy.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II illustrates
a motivating example, while Section III describes the architecture of the realized system. Section IV outlines the main
features of the developed smart guide. Section V consists of
a brief literature overview of technologies similar to those
provided by our platform Section VI provides a case study with
some implementation details and several preliminary experimental results. Finally, Section VII reports some conclusions
and the possible future work.
II.

M OTIVATING E XAMPLE

To better understand motivations behind our work, it is important to analyze the kind of relation that exists between
the exhibition and the visitors of a museum: the purpose of
the visitor is to see and learn more and not to explicitly
use the technology. For these reasons and to better appraise
and promote the museum heritage, it should be preferable to
provide exhibition objects with the capability of telling their
story, rather than to wait that users require in first person
(through multimedia guides) more information about an object,
as per usual in the majority of smart museum scenarios. As
1 www.databenc.it

2013 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 28-31th October 2013
motivating example, we can consider the case of a tourist
visiting an art exhibition within Maschio Angioino castle, in
Naples (Italy). The cultural environment offers, by a WIFI
connection, a web-based access to a multimedia collection
containing: digital reproductions of sculptures by Francesco
Jerace and other minor artists, educational videos, audio
guides, textual and hypermedia documents with description of
authors and sculptures. In order to make the user’s experience
more interesting and stimulating, the access to information
should be automatically delivered and customized based on
the specific profile of a visitor, which includes learning needs,
level of expertise and personal preferences, on user effective
location in the museum, on the sculpture “similarity” and on
information about the context in terms of number of persons
for each room, room fitness, network performances, etc.

•

Each user device is equipped with a Multimedia
Guide App (MGA) that allows the fruition of multimedia contents. When a user downloads the App,
a questionnaire is preliminarily submitted in order to
capture the his/her profile (e.g. favourite artworks,
artists, subjects, and kind of multimedia) and the
device features. When a user starts a visit within the
museum, a registration phase is also necessary to map
the device MAC address with the related IP address.

We can image a situation in which the tourist is walking
within a given exhibition room through several sculptures and
when he’s particularly close to one of them, its mobile device
is detected by the sensor placed on such a sculpture. Once
the tourist mobile device has been detected thanks to the
WSN technology, the sculpture begin to talk about itself, its
sculptor, its story and its status using multimedia facilities and
considering user preferences (e.g. only text and images data).
In this way, a “static” art exhibition is able to transform itself
into a “dynamic” one and the talking artworks surround the
visitor in a place that is now “animated.”
III.

S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE

Figure 1 describes a functional overview of the proposed
systems supporting a Talking Museum. At a glance, the system
can be seen as composed by the following main components.
•

A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is constituted by
a set of wireless sensors, each one deployed near a museum artefact (e.g. sculpture) and communicating with
the base station through the Zigbee protocol. Such
a component aims at scanning, using the Bluetooth
protocol, the areas surrounding sensors in order to
detect possible users that could be interested in the
observed object. When a device is recognized, the
related MAC address is sent to the base station that
forwards the information to the Gateway Server.

•

The Gateway Server (GS) hosts a set of daemon
processes able to filter and gather information coming
from the WSN: each process manages the communication with a given sensor. When information about the
presence of a user device near an object is notified on
the related stream, the GS a send request for contents
to the Multimedia Content Server. All information
about communication between users and artefacts are
properly stored in dedicated logs.

•

Fig. 1: System Overview.

The Multimedia Content Server (MCS) accepts a
request for contents from the GS, builds a multimedia
story in according to user preferences and delivers all
the information to the related user mobile App. The
MCS manages a multimedia repository and exploits
proper multimedia delivery techniques to propose to
users other object of interest arranged in the shape of
multimedia stories.

IV.

A MULTIMEDIA SMART GUIDE

In order to construct a set of smart services supporting
the Talking Museum metaphor, we exploit indoor localization
based services, semantic annotation and low level features
analysis techniques. The proposed approach, described in the
following subsections, relies on WSNs and Bluetooth communication infrastructures and technologies to determine users
location and context and combines two types of knowledge:
general knowledge about users’ and artworks locations (points
of interests) and specialized knowledge about a particular
domain, composed by users’ preferences and artworks related
contents and resources. To deliver efficiently selected information to a visitor on his mobile device, we also take into account
the constraints of a mobile device and the limited period of
attention of that user.
A. From localization to the artwork animation
Our approach is composed of five steps as shown in figure
2. When a visitor logs in the system, starting the smart

Fig. 2: The artowrk Animation Process.
guide application, his mobile device is detected by the WSN
deployed in the museum area. A handshake phase is engaged

2013 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 28-31th October 2013
to acquire the visitors mobile device MAC address and to
map it over an IP address belonging to the wireless network
domain. Logged user preferences and location information
will be employed during the contents tailoring and delivering
phases. At a glance, localization data processing relies on the
following main set of tables, kept in the MCS subsystem:
1)

2)
3)

DEVICE ADDRESS Table: it holds a triple containing association pairs linking physical MAC address
of users devices and the assigned IP address over
the wireless network system and a time to live field
(TTL), used to avoid an IP addresses wasting if
users devices are inactive after an elapsed timeout:
<MAC ADDR, IP ADDR, TIME TO LIVE>
SENSOR ARTWORK Table: it holds the associations between Bluetooth sensors and related artworks:
<SENSOR ID, ARTWORK ID>;
USER PROFILE MAC ADDRESS Table: it holds
the associations between user’s mobile devices
physical MAC address and logged user’s profile:
<USER PROFILE ID, MAC ADDRESS>

and can be described as follows. The GS receives a new
mobile device presence notification by the underlying WSN
and gathers such information to the MCS, that updates the
association DEVICE ADDRESS table, adding a new entry
related to the new device and setting the TTL field. According
to the same logic, when a device is no longer active in the
museum area (e.g. visitor shuts down the app, leaves the
museum area or the fixed timeout is elapsed) the assigned
IP address is released. After the end of the new device
registration phase, users localization phase is ready to start
as soon as user will cross an artwork surrounding area. When
Bluetooth sensors placed on the artworks notify the presence
of the users device to the GS, it gathers a new request to
the MCS and the actual talking process starts. A exampling
structure of the request forwarded during this phase follows:
< sender sensor id, request timestamp,
user device M AC Address >.
The MCS so provides to:
1)
2)
3)

identify the artwork related to the request sender
sensor, querying the SENSOR ARTWORK table;
retrieve the IP address assigned to the user’s device during the handshake phase, querying the DEVICE ADDRESS table;
retrieve the user’s profile by querying the association
table USER PROFILE MAC ADDRESS table;

In conclusion, given an artwork ready to talk to the users,
the contents of its telling story are selected analyzing the
matching features among user preferences, expressed by a set
of information enclosed in the user profile and by a set of
information related to the all multimedia contents available in
the MCS. The detailed contents matching and tailoring process
are described in the next sections.
B. Contents personalization process
The majority of approaches to contents tailoring in the multimedia realm generally exploits high level metadata, often
extracted in automatic or semi-automatic way from low level
features. These approaches suffer from several drawbacks: (i)

it is not always possible to extract in automatic and effective
way useful high level information from multimedia features,
(ii) for some kinds of multimedia data there is not a precise
correlation between high and low level information, (iii) there
is not always available explicit and useful information about
user preferences and feedbacks.
Our approach tries to avoid such drawbacks: (i) analyzing in
a separate way low and high level information, (ii) exploiting
system logs to implicitly determine information about a user,
(iii) considering as relevant content for the selection the
features of the object that a user is currently watching together
with other context information. Therefore, we try to merge
in a unique strategy some aspects of multimedia information
retrieval with the basic theory of modern adaptation systems.
The basic idea behind our proposal is that when a user is
located in the surrounding area of a museum artworks, the
system is able to: (i) capture this event; (ii) extract the set of
available multimedia objects related to that artwork; (iii) filter
only the set of candidate multimedia matching user preferences
[8]; (pre-filtering strategy); (iv) arranges such objects in apposite visiting paths considering other context information such
environmental conditions (post-filtering strategy).
C. Data and retrieval model
Our data and retrieval models, inspired by the Windsurf
ones [2], is composed of a database O of M multimedia
resources, O = {O1 , ..OM }, such as images, videos, and
documents, where each resource O is characterized of mo
elements, O = {o1 , ..omo } representing, regions of an image,
shots of a video, and parts of a document, respectively. Each
element o is described by way of low level features F that
represent, in an appropriate way, the content of o (e.g., the
color distribution of image’s regions). As for the retrieval
model, given a query object Q = {Q1 , ..Qm } composed of m
elements, and an element distance function δ, measuring the
dissimilarity of a given pair of elements (using their features),
we want to determine the top - k objects in O that are the
most similar with respect to Q. Similarity between objects is
numerically assessed by way of a object distance function dF
that combines together the single element distances into an
overall value. Consequently, resource Oa is considered better
than Ob for the query Qi if d(Q, Oa ) < d(Q; Ob ) holds [3].
The computation of the object distance dF is obtained by
combining three basic ingredients: (i) the element distance
δ, (ii) the set of constraints that specify how the component
elements of the query Q have to be matched to the component elements of another (database) object O, and (iii) the
aggregation function that combines distance values between
matched elements into an overall object distance value (e.g., a
simple average of distance values between matched elements).
The efficient resolution of queries over features is ensured by a
employing indices built on top of elements (e.g., image regions,
and video shots) based on the M-tree metric index [4]. In order
to enrich data representation, objects are annotated with high
level (semantic) descriptors S (e.g., labels describing what a
video shot is related to). Such descriptors are in the form
of keywords (or tags) and are semi-automatically assigned to
objects by means of a multimedia annotator that, starting from
a training set of pre-annotated objects, is able to predict sets

2013 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 28-31th October 2013
of good” tags able to effectively characterize the content of
new untagged objects [6].
We define the universe of tags T as the union of all possible
semantic descriptors to be associated to objects in O, and the
membership relation R ⊆ OxT that indicates that an object O
has assigned a tag in T . The annotation process is modelled as
a nearest neighbors (NN) problem on object elements and turn
into a set of graph-based problems. First, we try to discover
affinities between tags and an unlabelled object, which is done
using a Random Walk with Restart algorithm on a graph that
models current annotations as well as elements’ similarities.
Then, we compute pairwise tag correlations. Again, this relies
on the analysis of links in a (second-order) graph. Finally,
we combine the results of the two steps to derive a set of
terms which are both semantically correlated each other and
affine to the new object. This final step amounts to solve
an instance of the Maximum Weight Clique Problem on a
small graph. Note that, while for objects of type image tags
are directly associated to images, when annotating videos,
we are able to predict tags not only for shots but even for
videos, by opportunely propagate tags at the shot level to
the video level [5]. Given a user-provided set of tags, as
query semantic concepts, objects are selected by the query
processor by applying a co-occurrence-based distance function
dS on T . The search provides the set of objects (i.e., images,
videos/shots, documents) that share at least one tag with the
input set. Both low level features and semantic descriptors
concur to determine the multimedia relatedness d(Oi , Oj )
among two objects. In details, if Oi and Oj are of the same
type (e.g., we are comparing two images), we define their
global distance as the average between the contribution given
by low level features and the one provided by semantics, that
is: d(OI , Oj ) = dF (OI , Oj ) + dS (OI , Oj ) = 2; on the other
hand, if we are comparing objects of different type (e.g., a
document with a video), their multimedia relatedness equals
to their semantic distance only, dF (OI , Oj ) = dS (OI , Oj )
D. Contents tailoring strategy
When a user is near to a cultural POI, the adaptation system
has to be able to: (i) determine a set of candidate objects for the
telling process on the base of user needs and preferences (prefiltering stage); (ii) dinamically arranges the selected objects in
apposite visiting paths considering other context information
such as environmental conditions (post-filtering stage).
Prefiltering stage: Each object subject to recommendation
may be represented in different and heterogeneous feature
spaces. For instance, the picture of a artwork may be described
by annotations concerning its history , the materials it has
been built with, low-level image features, experts’ descriptions,
visitors’ descriptions and reviews, and so on. Each of these sets
of features contributes to the characterization of the objects to
different extents. Hence, it is important to consider congruently
each type of descriptor during the recommendation process.
The first step consists in clustering together ”similar” objects,
where the similarity should consider all (or subsets of) the
different spaces of features. To this purpose, we employ highorder star-structured co-clustering techniques [8] to address the
problem of heterogeneous data prefiltering. In this context, the
same set of objects is represented in different feature spaces.
Such data represent objects of a certain type, connected to

other types of data, the features, so that the overall data schema
forms a star structure of inter-relationships. This task consists
in clustering simultaneously the set of objects and the set of
values in the different feature spaces. In this way we obtain
a partition of the objects influenced by each of the feature
spaces and at the same time a partition of each feature space.
The prefiltering stage leverages the clustering results to select
a set of candidate objects by using the user’s profile, which
is modeled as sets of descriptors in the same spaces as the
objects’ descriptors.
 1
M
Let O =
be a set of M multimedia objects
 1O , ..O
N
and F = F , ..F
a set of N feature spaces. A dataset
can be viewed under the different views given by the different
feature spaces Fk . Therefore, the view k is associated with
each feature space Fk . Given a star-structured dataset SD over
O and F , the goal of the star-structured
data co−clustering is

to find a set
partitions Y = Y 1 , ..Y N over the feature
 of
set F = F 1 , ..F N and a partition X of the object set
O by optimizing a certain objective function. To solve the
high−order star−structured co−clustering problem, several algorithms have been proposed based on different approaches. In
this work, we adopt a parameter−less iterative algorithm that
maximizes the Goodman-Kruskal τ , a statistical measure of
association that automatically identifies a congruent number of
high-quality co−clusters [7]. In our recommendation
problem,

a user is represented as a set of vectors U = U 1 , ..U N in
the same N feature spaces describing the objects. Each vector
uk is updated each time the user visits (or re−visit) an object
by considering the object features in each space at the instant
of the visit. To provide a first candidate list of objects to be
delivered, we measure the cosine distance of each user vectors
associated to the k−th space, with the centroids of each object
clusters in the k−th space. For each space, the most similar
c
}
object cluster is chosen leading to N clusters {X1c , ..., XN
of candidate objects. Then, two different strategies can be
adopted to provide the pre-filtered list of candidate objects Oc
: (i) set-union strategy − the objects belonging
to the union
S
of all clusters are retained, i.e., Oc = k Xkc , (ii) threshold
strategy − the objects that appears in at least ths clusters
(ths ∈ {1, ..N })are retained.
The first strategy is suitable when user’s vectors are associated to very small clusters (e.g., because the user likes
very uncommon objects). In any other situation, the second
strategy is the most appropriate. As a final step, objects already
visited/liked/browsed by the user are filtered out. Notice that,
thanks to this approach, users are not described by set of
objects, but by sets of features that characterize the objects
they visit, like or browse.
Post-filtering stage. Finally, the list of suggested items,
which are selected as interesting by users, is organized in
apposite visiting paths (considering the distances from user
location): they are not fixed and are arranged on the base of
environmental situations.
E. Contents delivery
After the mobile device has received the adapted contents,
the results have to be presented to the user. From this moment,
the user can use three levels of refinement: (i) pointing to a
specific content among those ones presented in the delivered

2013 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 28-31th October 2013
list; (ii) select facets of resources relevant to the current
location and heading, where cultural related facets are location,
event, artwork and people, and (iii) select subfacets of the
selected facet, e.g. painting, photograph, artist.
V.

R ELATED WORKS

The definition and implementation of LBS able to support users in indoor environments like an art exhibition or
a museum is an active and multidisciplinary research field.
A current trend is to try to improve the cultural heritage
experiences by adopting new technologies that support the
use of mobile devices (smartphone, tablets, etc..).Since smartphones and wireless Internet connection became ubiquitous
in the last years, location based indoor interaction supported
via the WiFi, WSN or Bluetooth identification became a
standard methodology for mobile phone usage, especially in
the Cultural Heritage context, where it is important to localize
a visitor with respect to physical objects. In this scenario,
several works have been proposed aiming at experiment the
most promising technology to localize users and to delivery to
them the most suitable customized contents.
The authors of [9] proposed a network based ticket reservation system which is a localization-based smartphone application with augmented reality. The authors of [10] introduced
Personalized Location-based Traveler Recommender System
that provides personalized tourism information to its users.
As the cities are filled with huge buildings and numerous
large stores are open underground, most of the people spend
most of their time indoors. Therefore, LBS should be available
not only outdoor but also indoor. Developing outdoor LBS is
much easier than developing indoor LBS (ILBS) because of
GPS (Global Positioning System) and Map providers (Google,
for example). Since we cannot use GPS or the map in ILBS
development, researches on indoor positioning and floor map
(or drawing) provide service [11], [12] are actively being
performed. Another point of view to build a location based
smart guide in a museum is to target not just a single user
but also a group visiting it. The Sotto voce [13] system is
designed specifically with this goal providing a communication mechanism to support interaction. Finally, [1] reports an
example of location-aware mobile devices that offer innovative
experiences to end users. According to users localization,
in an indoor scenario, sometimes the accuracy is not so
important while in many cases is more important a system
able to recognize boundaries and positioning a person through
a symbolic location (e.g. in the main hall or in the first room).
Several methods have been proposed to solve the problem
using different media like infrared beacons [14] or radio
signals from wireless LAN [15], [16] RFID technology [17] to
detect user location. These location based applications create
situations where users can experiment real-virtual contiguity
(the real experience and the digital experience are overlapped)
and enhanced reality (the mobile device strengthens the quality
of the real experience).
VI.

A CASE OF STUDY

The aim of these experiments is to implement and test a
smart multimedia guide system through Wifi and Bluetooth
based mobile devices that will guide and assist the visitors,
by exploiting their position within the art exhibitions and

museums. As depicted in Section II, we use as real case
study an art exhibition within the Maschio Angioino castle,
in Naples (Italy). The multimedia collection is constituted
by about 4500 images, texts and audio files about sculptures
of Francesco Jerace and other minor artists. Moreover, we
developed, implemented and tested the MGA on the Samsung
Galaxy S3 Android phone. Figure 3 shows snapshots of our
mobile App.

Fig. 3: From left to right: A multimedia story proposed to a
visitor in the sculpture surrounding area, a list of proposed
images, a proposed textual narrative of a sculpture.
A. Implementation Details
In the following, we report some implementation details
concerning the developed prototype.
The WSN component have been realized and tested using
the Waspmote and Meshlium models of products offered by
Libelium2 (using Bluetooth devices of Class 1 and 2), but at
the moment we have not terminated yet the deployment of the
WSN within Maschio Angioino rooms. Such platforms allow
to detect, as an example, iPhone and Android devices but more
generally any device which works with WiFi or Bluetooth
interfaces. Users’ devices could be detected without the need
of being connected to an specific Access Point, enabling the
detection of any device which comes into the coverage area
of a Meshlium base station, but, in the proposed approach, a
set of Waspmote sensors nodes are employed to perform the
indoor localization task. Our choice can be further motivated
considering that such devices allow to control the Bluetooth
inquiry area with seven different power levels in order to set
different coverage zones from 5 to 50m that can be decreased
to obtain higher level of precision in detecting users’ devices in
the artworks surrounding area. distance of any detected device
is calculated exploiting the RSSI value, received during the
inquiry process slog with the MAC address of the Bluetooth
device. RSSI values usually go from -40dBm (nearest nodes)
to -90dBm (farthest ones). Furthermore, Bluetooth, WiFi and
ZigBee radios are able to coexist without causing interferences
with each other because, even if WiFi, ZigBee and Bluetooth
work in the 2.4GHz frequency band (2.400 - 2.480MHz),
however, the Bluetooth radio integrated in Meshlium device
uses an algorithm called Adaptive Frequency Hopping (AFH)
which improves the common algorithm used by Bluetooth
(FHSS) and enables the Bluetooth radio to dynamically identify channels already in use by ZigBee and WiFi devices and
2 http://www.libelium.com/

2013 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 28-31th October 2013
TABLE I: Comparison between our system and no facilities
Task Class
Q1
Q1
Q2
Q2
Q3
Q4

Strategy
Without any help
Our System
Without any help
Our System
Without any help
Our System

ta (min)
6
4
8
6
16
10

nr
4
2
5
3
6
4

to avoid them. The GS component has been implemented by
several JAVA libraries exploiting multi-threading facilities. In
addition, communication logs have been stored into a proper
repository managed by by the Nosql DBMS Cassandra. The
MCS component exploits ad-hoc JAVA libraries to build the
multimedia story of a sculpture on the top of the multimedia
collection managed by PostgreSQL DBMS and on the base of
user preferences appositely captured and modeled as described
in Section IV. Finally, a user can interact with our system using
at the moment an Android MGA. The presentation logic is
based on apposite widgets. The client requests are elaborated
by JAVA Servlets and the results are sent to the client in form
of XML data.

the Internet of Things technologies in order to make objects
of a museum exhibition able to talk during users visit and
capable of automatically telling their story using multimedia
facilities. In particular we customized the system for an indoor
museum, providing to tourists personalized contetnts. Then,
we investigated the effectiveness of the proposed approach in
the considered scenario, based on several parameters. Experimental results showed that our approach is quite promising
and encourages further research. Future work will be devoted
to finish the deploy of the entire system in the next months
and collect more complete and interesting experimental results
about the real advantages of the proposed technology w.r.t to
oher approaches, also considering the related cost and benefits.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

B. Preliminary Experiments
Location-based and recommender systems are generally
complex applications that are based on a combination of several models, algorithms and heuristics. Recently, researchers
began examining issues related to users subjective opinions
and developing additional criteria to evaluate these systems.
In order to evaluate the impact of the system on the users
we have conducted the following experiments. We asked a
group of about 25 people (all medium experts in art) to visit
a virtual reproduction of the exhibit (8 rooms containing the
collection of sculptures) obtained by the Unity 3D framework
and complete several browsing tasks (15 tasks per user) of
different complexity (i.e. Low Complexity tasks - Q1, Medium
Complexity tasks - Q2, High Complexity tasks - Q3) without
the help of our system. After this test, we asked them to
browse once again the same collection with the assistance
of our recommender system and complete other 15 different
tasks of the same complexity. Each task consists in exploring a
certain number of sculptures satisfying several constraints. The
complexity of a task depends on several factors: the number
of objects to explore, the type of desired features (either low
or high-level), and the number of constraints (genre, author,
subject). A simple strategy has been used to evaluate the
results of this experiment: empirical measurements of access
complexity in terms of number of virtual rooms and time. In
particular, we measured the following parameters: (i) Access
Time (ta ) - the average time spent by the users to visit all
the objects for a given class of tasks; (ii) Number of Rooms
(nr ) - the average number of visited virtual rooms necessary to
visit all the requested objects for a given class of tasks. Table
1 reports the average values of ta and nr , for both without
and with the help of our system, for each of the four task
complexity levels defined earlier.
VII.

C ONCLUSION

In this paper we proposed a novel location-based services
platform for the Cultural Heritage domain. The system exploits

View publication stats

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

F. Amato, A. Chianese, V. Moscato, A. Picariello, G. Sperli SNOPS: a
smart environment for cultural heritage applications Proc. of the 12th
Int. Workshops on Web Information and Data Manag., pp. 49-56, (2012).
Bartolini, I., Ciaccia, P., Patella, M. Query processing issues in regionbased image databases, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 25(2), pp. 389-420 (2010)
Ilyas, I.F., Beskales, G., Soliman, M.A. A survey of top-k query processing techniques in relational database systems, ACM Comput. Surv. 40
(4) (2008)
Ciaccia, P., Patella, M., Zezula, P. M-tree: An efficient access method for
similarity search in metric spaces, Proc. of VLDB, pp. 426-435 (1997)
Bartolini, I., Patella, M., Romani, C. SHIATSU: tagging and retrieving
videos without worries, Multimed. Tools Appl. 63(2), pp. 357-385 (2013)
Bartolini, I., Ciaccia, P. Imagination: exploiting link analysis for accurate
image annotation In: Proc. of AMR 2007, pp.32-44, Springer (2007)
Ienco, D., Robardet, C., Pensa, R.G., Meo, R. Parameter-less coclustering for star-structured heterogeneous data Data Min. Knowl.
Discov. 26(2), pp. 217-254 (2013)
M. Fleuren User Profiling Techniques: a comparative study in the context
of e-commerce websites, Bachelors Thesis, 2012, Utrecht University
Kang, S.K. , Kang, H.K. , Kim, J.E. , Lee, H. , Lee, J.B. A study on the
mobile communication network with smart phone for building of location
based real time reservation system, IJMUE, 7 (2), pp 17-36 (2012)
Husain, W., Dih, L.Y. A framework of a Personalized Location-based
traveler recommendation system in mobile application, Intern. J. of
Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering, 7 (3), pp. 11-18 (2012)
Chon, J., Cha, H. LifeMap: A smartphone-based context provider for
location-based services, IEEE Perv. Comput., 10 (2), pp. 58-67 (2011)
Gyeyoung L., Jaegeol Y. A Review of the Techniques for Indoor
Location based Service, Int. J. of Grid and Dist. Comp., 5 (1), (2012)
Aoki, P.M., Grinter, R.E., Hurst, A., Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D.,
Woodruff, A. Sotto Voce: Exploring the interplay of conversation and
mobile audio spaces, Proc. on Human Factors in Comp. Sys., 4 (1), pp.
431-438 (2002)
Moreno, M.V., Zamora, M.A., Santa, J., Skarmeta, A.F. An indoor
localization mechanism based on RFID and IR data in ambient intelligent
environments, Proceedings - 6th Int. Conf. on Innovative Mobile and
Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing, IMIS 2012, pp. 805-810.
P. Barsocchi, F. Potorti ,P. Nepa Device-Free Indoor Localization for
AAL Applications, MobiHealth 2012, pp 361-368
Barsocchi, P., Chessa, S., Ferro, E., Furfari, F., Potorti, F. Context driven
enhancement of RSS-based localization systems, Proceedings - IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications, pp. 463-468 (2012)
Ye, A., Ling, Y., Xu, L., Yang, X. An improved RFID-based localization
algorithm for wireless sensor networks IJDSN (2013)

