International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 9, No. 8, August 2019

Augmented Reality Enhanced Ubiquitous-Learning in
Museum
Yi-Hsien Lin, Shu-Hsuan Chang, Tien-Chi Huang, Yu-Ting Lin, and Yu-Jie Chen

Abstract—Museums are ideal informal learning environments.
This study develops an augmented reality (AR) system (APP and
management platform) for visitors to actively explore learning
resources in museum. There are three main parts of the system,
public mode (for adults), child mode (for elementary or high
school students), and backend management platform (for
museum manager). To arouse visitors’ motivation, this study
adopts problem-based learning (PBL) as main theory base of the
system. Along with iBeacon indoor positioning technology, the
AR (augmented reality) is adopted to display questions (inspire
visitors thinking and interaction) nearby the exhibition items. In
this sense, the learning may actually happen in museums.
Index Terms—Augmented reality, learning in museum,
problem-based learning, iBeacon, indoor positioning.

I. INTRODUCTION
Museums are ideal informal learning environments. This
type of informal education occurs outside of the school, where
learners fulfill their learning objectives through their own
interest in learning and systematically acquire information.
In the words of Francis Bacon, “Tell me and I forget. Teach
me and I may remember. Involve me and I learn.”, which
notes the importance of interaction in learning process.
Although learning resources available through museums
abound, the traditional one-to-many guidance could lead to
visitors overlook the educational value and meaning of the
exhibitions. On the others hand, museum once argue that the
method of “allowing the works to speak for themselves” is
only meaningful for experts with prior knowledge or an
understanding of related concepts [1]. Furthermore, in
traditional museums, museum guides are paired with groups
of many visitors, meaning that visitors may be restricted by
spatial factors, making it difficult to fully appreciate exhibited
works. Despite the fact that each visitor is now able to visit
exhibitions at their own pace as a result of various
technologies maturing over the past several years, such as the
development of personal audio guide devices, the one-way
explanations of museum content do not allow them to reflect

on and derive inspiration from the tour. In other words,
museum guides should help to communicate museum
information, and interactivity helps learners understand that
information.
For this reason, this study aims to build a problem-based
augmented reality (AR) learning platform to help museums
receive visitors of all ages in order to improve the educational
value of museums. In this AR platform, a problem-based
learning (PBL) strategy is adopted, which uses real-world
situations or problems to guide visitors’ thinking [2]. In this
process, the platform emphasizes to visitors the importance of
defining problems and establishing hypotheses, as well as
collecting and analyzing information to improve their critical
and reflective learning abilities. Based on the above, the use
of problems to trigger the publics’ active reflection can also
generate educational value for museums. AR technology uses
handheld screens to augment the learning information
presented in real environments, thereby providing learning
interactivity. By combining these two strategies, visitors are
encouraged to actively reflect and interact with one another.
Regarding technology, AR and iBeacon indoor positioning
sensor technologies comprise the technological system
proposed in this study. PBL environments serve as the main
axis of the system, allowing for the establishment of a more
ideal museum learning environment.
In this environment, problems for visitors of different age
groups can be established, enabling them to actively think
about problems related to specific exhibition works or items
and gain feedback from reflection. The discussion platform
guides visitors to understand the ideas of other people and to
debate with one another. This allows visitors to view works
from different perspectives, providing a greater variety of
paths to obtain information related to an exhibited work.
Through the process of interacting with an exhibited work,
examining opinions or responses different from one’s own,
and conducting mutual debates, visitors comprehend
knowledge, learn, and think.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
A. Museum Guides
The primary objective of museum guides is to
communicate the meaning of exhibition items and provide a
wealth of information to guide the public to understand
exhibition items on cognitive and emotional levels, thereby
achieving the goals of social education. This paper jointly
addresses traditional tour guide methods, which can be
categorized as staff guides and non-staff guides, as shown in
Table I.

Manuscript received January 13, 2019; revised May 24, 2019.
Yi-Hsien Lin is with the Lukan Senior High School, Taiwan (e-mail:
yslin@mail.lksh.chc.edu.tw).
Shu-Hsuan Chang is with the Department of Industrial Education and
Technology. She is also with e-Learning Center, National Changhua
University of Education (NCUE), Taiwan (e-mail: shc@cc.ncue.edu.tw).
Tien-Chi Huang is with the Department of Information Management,
National Taichung University of Science and Technology, Taiwan (e-mail:
tchuang@nutc.edu.tw).
Yu-Ting Lin and Yu-Jie Chen are with National Taichung University of
Science and Technology, Taiwan (e-mail: abc850927@gmail.com,
yujiemilk@gmail.com).

doi: 10.18178/ijiet.2019.9.8.1263

543

International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 9, No. 8, August 2019
TABLE I: ANALYSIS OF TOUR GUIDE METHODS [3]
Staff Guides
Ordinary Guides
(Fixed)
Exhibition Room
Presentation (Topical)
Q&A Service
(Q&A Reception Desk)
Expert Guides
(On-Site Expert
Presentations)

Pros: Guides present information in a
detailed and clear manner, and
can engage in real-world
interaction with visitors.
Cons: When there are too many
visitors,
guides
cannot
individually satisfy the needs
of each visitor, and fixed
presentation sites make it
difficult to see exhibition
items.
Non-Staff Guides

Description Card

Folding Brochure

Multimedia Guides
(Audio Guides)

Fig. 1. Operation of the iBeacon indoor positioning sensing technology.

Pros: Clear and simple explanation of
content, easy to read.
Cons: During busy hours, description
cards are difficult to view.
Pros: Wealth of guiding information.
Cons: High printing costs, easily
results in wasted resources.
Pros: Multimedia is attractive to
visitors and generates interest
in exhibition items.
Cons: Not very interactive with
visitors, vibrant audiovisual
elements can distract visitor
attention from exhibition
items.

B. Application of AR and Indoor Positioning Sensor
Technology in Educational Environments
AR is a way of integrating the real world and virtual objects,
and a technology that can instantaneously generate 3-D
interactions. Using a camera, algorithms are executed on the
captured image, which allows the user to use their sensory
perceptions to directly or indirectly view virtual objects
projected onto the real world and to immediately interact with
these objects.
Regarding the educational elements of AR technologies,
AR has been applied to a variety of educational curricula,
making them more dynamic or improving learning outcomes.
[4], [5] According to the effects of these on learning
performance, AR teaching methods provide students a sense
of curiosity, promote their sustained attentiveness, and can
effectively increase student motivation, enhancing learning
performance. The above research confirms that when applied
to learning, AR can improve students’ motivations for
learning and increase their levels of participation and
attentiveness during the learning process.
Thus, this study introduces AR technology into museums
and allows users to search for specific icons in exhibition halls
and scan these in order to be provided with information from
the system. During the process of museum visits,
human-machine interaction is used to elevate visitor curiosity
and interest in exhibition items and stimulate visitors’
motivations for learning, thereby achieving learning efficacy.
Regarding the indoor positioning technology used in this
study, iBeacon is a signal transmitter that allows nearby
electronic devices to sense and accurately position using
low-power Bluetooth technology [6]. When the smartphone
app’s Bluetooth wireless signal enters the scope of coverage
of the transmitter signal, the app automatically receives the
tag information. This operation is shown in Fig. 1.
544

The University of Oklahoma has used iBeacon technology
to create virtual tours, allowing students to conveniently
search for books and manuscripts in the university’s special
collections and encouraging them to discover new knowledge.
In educational games, the iBeacon Treasure Hunt game uses
positioning to emit signals. Each signal gives students a clue
to help them advance to the next level, enabling them to use
their self-guiding ability to receive rewards.
Therefore, we use iBeacon’s push notification function to
allow museum visitors to use iBeacon to sense the location of
their mobile device and provide information related to
exhibition items. In this way, visitors can use their mobile
devices to immediately receive text, images, and dedicated
multimedia information related to the exhibition item,
improving their understanding of the item or enabling them to
search for new information related to their questions or
reflections on it.
C. Problem-Based Learning
PBL was first defined by Barrows and Tamblyn (1980) as
follows: “Learning comes from the process by which
problems are understood and resolved, and problems are
established before learning begins.” PBL is an educational
method that disrupts traditional educational methods centered
on students, and aims to use real-world problems to guide
students in active learning [2]. It uses problems to encourage
students to use their prior knowledge and search for
information, so that they can think, understand problems, and
propose problem resolution methods. In this way, PBL can
generate deeper learning impressions in students and
strengthen their knowledge and understanding.
Scholars have applied PBL in educational strategies and
experimental research. These studies used group experiments
(where each group contained four students) in which some
groups used PBL methods. Through data analysis and
interviews, this research confirmed that PBL effectively
promotes the learning process and improves “problem solving
skills” and other related skills. As such, PBL methods are
helpful for improving problem solving and extending thought.
[2]
There are various PBL models. This study refers to the
five-step learning process proposed by Barrow (1985), the
pioneer of PBL. It further combines this with detailed steps of
user operation for comparison, and summarizes a museum
PBL mode map to clarify the operational state of the system
represented by each step, as shown in Fig. 2.

International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 9, No. 8, August 2019

functions on the main screen to execute operations. First, the
AR guide can be used to view information related to the
exhibition site in addition to basic methods of operation. Next,
AR is used (Fig. 4) to respond to problems, primarily by
scanning specific AR codes at the exhibition site to transmit
information. When a user successfully scans the correct AR
code, AR is used to display problems on the user’s screen,
accompanied by 3-D GIFs. Next, users brainstorm based on
the problem presented in the AR response. By design, the
problem serves as a starting point and has no standard
response, meaning that the responses are stored on the
discussion board according to their corresponding topic (Fig.
5) and can be viewed and reflected upon by all users. This is
distinct from ordinary methods of viewing exhibitions, and
users can search for problems to reflect on. This method is
compatible with the process of PBL.

Fig. 2. Museum PBL mode map.

This study enables museum visitors to use their mobile
devices during their visit to activate their learning motivation.
When the system is used, it is first divided into two modes.
The first mode aims to enhance interest in the museum and
uses exploration to allow visitors to receive tips and solve
problems. The second mode aims to encourage visitors to
engage in thinking so that they can solve problems and to view
different opinions on discussion boards. PBL environments
prevent museum learners from passively receiving
information and instructions in a unidirectional manner,
causing them to acquire and link new knowledge with prior
knowledge through their own learning process.

Fig. 3. System technology framework.

III. SYSTEM FRAMEWORK AND TECHNOLOGY APPLICATIONS
A. System Planning
The system used in this study was developed for an
Android mobile device. The system can be delineated into the
mobile application end and server end. The system server uses
XAMPP technology to establish a platform and integrates a
MySQL database to store new user information. Furthermore,
it uses a PHP backend program as a communication language
between the front end of the system and database, thereby
providing an exhibition site management platform that
exhibition site managers can use to remotely alter digital
exhibition content at any time according to the needs of the
exhibition. The mobile application end of the system is
produced with the Unity game engine tool, and embeds
Vuforia SDK AR technology to strengthen the interactivity
between exhibition items and visitors, helping visitors
integrate among the exhibition item learning environment and
rooting the system in learning effectiveness. Furthermore,
websocket technology is used to instantly transmit
information to the database for system analysis and
maintenance.
The system is subdivided into three parts: the Android
smartphone guide platform, exhibition manager platform, and
system database server. The overall system divisions are
shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 4. AR Response (Public mode).

Fig. 5. Discussion Board (Public mode) .

C. Child Mode
The design style for this mode employs an adventurous
method of presentation, and is well suited for children. First,
users can use the map feature to understand the scope of the
exhibition site, topic items, and to view tip locations. When
users successfully scan the correct QR code, they are shown a
congratulatory window, and the progress bar at the top of the
screen indicates that the user has advanced one space. The

B. Public Mode
In the public mode, AR technology and integration of an
active PBL environment enable users to select from three
545

International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 9, No. 8, August 2019

discovered topics are saved in the application’s record
function, where users can view, respond to, and reflect on the
topic based on the surrounding exhibition area. Correct
responses to each topic presented in this mode can be found at
the exhibition site and exhibition items. If the user responds
successfully, their progress bar advances one space (two
topics are used in this example, which can be altered
according to the needs of the exhibition). In addition, the tip
function is primarily integrated with the iBeacon sensor
technology. If the user cannot scan the correct response, they
can approach a tip marker on the map to receive a tip. This
helps users scan the correct response.

offices, museum visits, or topical exhibitions. In this way, the
system can improve off-campus teaching, enable students to
acquire more information and knowledge, and contribute
towards achieving teaching outcomes. Using smart handheld
devices and a virtual reality integrated field-based learning
system, we hope to create new standards for informal
education.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Financial support on this work from the Ministry of Science
and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 106-2511-S-025 -003
-MY3)

D. Backend Management Platform
The backend management platform is an auxiliary
application system constructed for the use of museum staff. It
provides functions for visitors to conduct follow-up analysis,
a data visualization interface, text placement analysis, and a
PBL problem database. The backend management platform
makes it convenient for museum staff to manage topics or
make revisions, or to view the status of topic responses. For
example, museum staff can use the platform to find and delete
responses that are indecent or unsuitable for the topic, and to
maintain the accuracy of discussion board content. Staff can
also use the platform to determine the number of registered
users and their age range. As such, museum staff need only
use the backend management platform to update and maintain
application content, allowing them to conveniently achieve
their objectives and greatly reducing maintenance costs.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

IV. CONCLUSIONS
With the rapid development of technology, a wide variety
of objects have been integrated with technology. We observed
this in the field of informal education, in which we discovered
many problems. Therefore, the system developed in this study
combines AR and location sensing technology to establish a
PBL environment, and uses information technology to assist
learning in the field of informal education.
PBL is the main axis around which this system is developed.
Based on this, a universal system for informal education
environments is established on Android mobile devices.
Museum staff can use the web end of the system to easily alter
content presented in the app, and users can use their
smartphones to directly connect with and learn in the informal
education environment. The adult and child modes designed
for this system generate different learning experiences
according to learners’ individual needs, activating learner
interest, and utilize interesting problems and tips or other
users’ views to integrate the user with the informal education
environment and allow them to explore and interact with the
site. This system aims to provide users with a greater number
and breadth of perspectives through the process of learning in
informal education environments.
In the future, this system can be applied to many informal
education fields and accompany learning environments
generated by the system to improve the learning outcomes of
individuals within the learning environment. Furthermore, it
is hoped that the system can be introduced to schools’
off-campus teaching methods, such as trips to corporate
546

R. Burnham and E. Kai-Kee, “Teaching in the art museum:
Interpretation as experience,” Getty Publications, 2011.
M. J. Duncan, M. Smith, and K. Cook, “Implementing online problem
based learning (PBL) in postgraduates new to both online learning and
PBL: An example from strength and conditioning,” Journal of
Hospitality, Leisure, Sport & Tourism Education, vol. 12, pp. 79-84,
2013.
J. D. Wineman and J. Peponis, “Constructing spatial meaning: Spatial
affordances in museum design,” Environment and Behavior, vol. 42,
no. 1, pp.86-109, 2010.
J. Kysela and P. Štorková, “Using augmented reality as a medium for
teaching history and tourism,” Procedia-Social and Behavioral
Sciences, vol. 174, pp. 926-931, 2015.
D. Nincarean, M. B. Alia, N. D. A. Halim, and M. H. A. Rahman,
“Mobile augmented reality: The potential for education,”
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 103, pp. 657-664,
2013.
C. Swedberg, “Beacons guide and inform University of Oklahoma
students,” IOT Journal, 2015.

Copyright © 2019 by the authors. This is an open access article distributed
under the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
work is properly cited (CC BY 4.0).
Yi-Hsien Lin is currently a president of National
Lukan Senior High School in Changhua and a Ph.D.
candidate of NCUE, Taiwan. His research interests
include internet ethics and educational technology.

Shu-Hsuan Chang is currently a professor of the
Department of Industrial Education and Technology as
well as the director of E-Learning Center, National
Changhua University of Education (NCUE), Taiwan.
She received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in industrial
engineering from National Chiao-Tung University,
Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree in the Department of
Industrial Education and Technology from NCUE,
Taiwan. Her research interests include engineering & technological
education, technology management, innovation management, and
photonics.
Tien-Chi Huang is an associate professor in the
Department of Information Management at National
Taichung University of Science and Technology,
Taiwan. His current research interests include
e-learning, m-learning, u-learning, teaching material
design, and evaluation. Dr. Huang’s research is
published or is forthcoming in Computers and
Education, Journal of Educational Technology &
Society, Telematics and Informatics, Information Fusion, The Electronic
Library, Multimedia Systems, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, Expert
Systems with Applications, International Education Studies, and a number
of national and international conference proceedings.

International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 9, No. 8, August 2019
Yu-Ting Lin received her bachelor's degree in 2018
from National Taichung University of Science and
Technology. After graduation, she is a programmer and
web designer.

Yu-Jie Chen received a bachelor's degree in 2018 from
National Taichung University of Science and
Technology. Currently she is a Master's Student and her
research interests are VR/AR in education.

547

