              applied
              sciences
Article
Ble Based Indoor Positioning System and Minimal Zone
Searching Algorithm (MZS) Applied to Visitor Trajectories
within a Museum
Richard Jérémy *, Bertet Karell and Faucher Cyril

                                          L3i Laboratory, 17000 La Rochelle, France; karell.bertet@univ-lr.fr (B.K.); cyril.faucher@univ-lr.fr (F.C.)
                                          * Correspondence: jeremy.richard2@univ-lr.fr


                                          Featured Application: This paper introduces a new algorithm to retrieve the position of a user from
                                          BLE data, shaped as a zone. This algorithm has not sought to compete in terms of accuracy with
                                          already in place indoor positioning algorithm, but rather show a simple and new way to work with
                                          such data. This article also describes a typical indoor positioning experiment inside a museum that
                                          can be easily reproduced and that doesn’t need a lot of material.

                                          Abstract: Museums are perfect experimentation grounds for indoor positioning technologies. Indeed,
                                          museum managers are always pleased to hold these kinds of events where it offers the opportunity
                                          to the public to be a part of such experimentation and allowing us at the same time to popularize our
                                          research with them. In this paper, we describe an experiment that held within the museum of natural
                                          history of La Rochelle with a class of high school volunteers. We will explain our systems that has
         
                                   been built to work in this specific case, and among other things formalize our algorithm for indoor
                                          localization that has not had an equivalent in the state of the art. The minimal zone searching algorithm
Citation: Jérémy, R.; Karell, B.;
Faucher, C. Ble Based Indoor
                                          (MZS) can compute in real time the position of a visitor, shaped as a zone with an average surface of
Positioning System and Minimal            3 m2 when resources are limited and when the placement of nodes must respect the constraints imposed
Zone Searching Algorithm (MZS)            by the room’s layout. This method offered good results with data collected during the experimentation,
Applied to Visitor Trajectories within    such as a meaningful representation of the position of a visitor and most importantly a stable execution
a Museum. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107.      during the whole experience even when the subject was in tight spaces.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app11136107
                                          Keywords: Bluetooth Low Energy; indoor positioning system; Smart Museum
Academic Editors: Alessio De Angelis
and Francesco Santoni


Received: 31 May 2021
                                          1. Introduction
Accepted: 24 June 2021
Published: 30 June 2021
                                               The field of indoor positioning seeks the location of an individual, as we can have
                                          with GPS, but in a building [1]. As signals from satellites can’t go through walls in those
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          places, a typical indoor positioning system is composed of a set of emitter sending a
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          periodic signal (many types of signals are used such as radio frequency [2,3], ultrasound
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          and infrared) [4–6] and a set of receivers. Based on the strength of the signal measured
iations.                                  between an emitter and a receiver (called RSSI for Received Signal Strength Indication),
                                          the goal is to determine the position of the user within a room. Among all the signal used
                                          in such systems, the BLE (For Bluetooth Low Energy) became more and more popular since
                                          2013, with the iBeacon technology designed specifically for indoor localization, with many
                                          applications such as [7].
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                               In recent years, a certain number of indoor positioning studies are aiming to bring
This article is an open access article
                                          tracking technologies to museums [8–10]. Besides allowing museum managers to have a
distributed under the terms and
                                          better overview of their places and thus having a better feedback on visits (which pieces
conditions of the Creative Commons        of art are popular, and which ones are left), this also makes it possible to study behavior
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     of visitors in such environments [11,12]. Moreover, museums are perfect experimentation
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          grounds for indoor positioning technologies. Indeed, museum managers are always pleased
4.0/).                                    to hold these kinds of events where it offers the opportunity to the public to be a part of



Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11136107                                                    https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                            2 of 14




                            such experimentation and allowing us at the same time to popularize our research with
                            them. On top of that, visitors stay a long time within the same room and walk slowly, which
                            allow us to better capture their path.
                                 But museums also bring with them constrains that indoor localization researchers have
                            to deal with. First, some studies apply machine learning algorithm for indoor localization
                            systems as explain in [13], offering incredible accuracy values and great results overall. It’s
                            very difficult to use such methods in museums, as it will take a lot of resources and time
                            to collect data in order to train those models that will only work on one museum (As the
                            architecture and room layout is not the same between museums). Second, we are limited
                            in the number and placements of nodes for our indoor positioning systems. Indeed, our
                            nodes should not disturb visitors during their tours (so we can’t place them in the middle
                            of the way) and we have to work around artwork and room layout that were not always
                            designed to accommodate an indoor positioning system.
                                 In this paper, we will describe our indoor positioning experimentation and the system
                            we used to get the position of a visitor, that can be used in real-time. Beside the data process
                            architecture, we will propose a new algorithm which at our knowledge has not had an
                            equivalent in the state of the art and that we named the minimal zone searching algorithm
                            (MSZ). We will then show that this algorithm allows use to get the position of a visitor as a
                            zone with an average surface of 3 m2 even when the placement of the nodes is not optimal.

                            2. Materials and Methods
                            2.1. Our Indoor Positioning System
                                 Our indoor positioning system is composed of a set of Raspberry Pi (Study like [14]
                            used a similar system) playing the role of sensor and badges to wear around the neck send-
                            ing a BLE signal. Most indoor localization approaches tend to use smartphone applications,
                            but as we wanted to be as simple as possible, a basic necklace doesn’t require too much
                            investment from visitor and is less intrusive. Also, it avoids technical problems such as
                            storage, type of phone or its version etc.
                                 In Figure 1 we can see a representation of our system of indoor positioning.




                            Figure 1. Data collection architecture.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                           3 of 14




                            2.2. Data Processing
                                 Figure 2 explain our data processing architecture in real time. The data collection
                            step follows Figure 1 directly. The position of the user is monitored during n seconds,
                            when n is the value of the time parameter, in this paper, we used a time window of 5 s.
                            The transmission frequency of our BLE emitter is 1 Hz. We collect data during 5 s and then
                            we apply the following steps of the data preprocessing. Using only BLE signal in an indoor
                            positioning system expose us to use data subject to imprecision and outliers. We then need
                            to collect a certain amount of data to overcome them.




                            Figure 2. Data processing architecture.

                            2.2.1. Moving Average Method
                                  The moving average method is frequently used in indoor positioning systems [15–17]
                            as it reduces the value of outliers and smooths the signal making it easier to process.
                                  Figure 3 shows the impact of the moving average method on raw data collected by
                            one sensor, smoothing the signal and making it easier to process by removing the drastic
                            variation in our values.

                            2.2.2. Threshold Filter
                                 The threshold filter step consists to compute the mean value of all RSSI data after the
                            moving average output, and then decide if the sensor is relevant or not. Indeed, in our case
                            the museum has several floors and sometime the BLE signal sent by the visitor’s badge
                            passes through the ceiling. In this paper, we won’t take into account an RSSI value lower
                            than −90 dB. Meaning that we consider that the visitor is not in the studied room if the
                            value is less that the threshold value. The output of this step is a list of sensors and their
                            associated average RSSI value during the last 5 s.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                              4 of 14




                            Figure 3. Impact of moving average method on raw data collected by one sensor.

                            2.2.3. Distance Calculation
                                 The RSSI distance measurement uses the logarithmic distance path-loss model, used
                            in several studies using BLE signals such as [17,18]:

                                                           Ls = (−10n)log10 ( RSSIs ) + L0
                            where Ls is the distance in meter based on the RSSI value of sensor s, n is the broadcasting
                            power value (2 in our case) and L0 is the measured RSSI power at 1 m. In our case, L0
                            is equal on average to −62 dB, but it is mandatory to keep in mind that this value can
                            drastically change depending on the environment (such as the size of the room studied)
                            and thus this constant must be measured in all new environments.

                            2.2.4. Positional Algorithms
                                 In this step we apply the positional algorithms requested. Three algorithms have been
                            used during this experimentation.
                                 (1) Triangulation:
                                 The triangulation algorithm such as explain in [19] have been used as it was suitable
                            to our problem. The only minor adjustment we made is that we take into account the zone
                            between all intersection points as a potential position of the visitor. As we are working
                            with data coming from a window of 5 s, a zone is more representative in this context.
                                 (2) Trilateration:
                                 The trilateration algorithm explained in [20] and often used in BLE based indoor
                            positioning works such as [21–23] returned poor results in our case. It may come from the
                            non-optimal placement of our sensors within the room (Such as the “grid” placement),
                            the exclusive use of BLE signal and the 5 s window of data collection which is not suitable
                            for accurate and precise localization in a single point (x, y) of the visitor. In the majority of
                            cases, the trilateration did not return any position.
                                 (3) Minimal zone searching algorithm (MZS):
                                 We also used our proposed algorithm, the MZS algorithm, which will be described
                            in the next section. Considering all sensors within the room, it iterates until getting the
                            minimal zone, representing the movement of a visitor.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                             5 of 14




                                 (4) Recalibration:
                                 We used a common method for all positional algorithms. When a calculated point
                            such that circle intersection with the triangulation or a Γs point (The key part of the MZS
                            that we will explain in the next section) is located outside the studied room, we put it down
                            at the limit of this one as described in Figure 4.




                            Figure 4. Recalibration of computed point based on room limit.

                                 The angle line in Figure 4 connects a reference point with the point outside the room
                            in order to determine the angle of the intersection with the limit of the room. This reference
                            point is the second intersection point in the triangulation algorithm, and the corresponding
                            Γs point for sensor s in the proposed algorithm. This simple method has offered significant
                            results in our case.

                            2.2.5. Frame Rendering
                                  The final step of the data processing architecture is the frame rendering. As our system
                            seeks to render in real time a positioning suggestion, the system will display the current
                            position of the visitor in the room each 5 s. The frame rendering is made in python using
                            the library matplotlib.

                            3. Minimal Zone Searching (MZS), a New Positional Algorithm
                                  The goal of the proposed algorithm is to find the smallest possible zone where the
                            visitor is likely to be at a certain point in time. As we saw in the previous section, we are
                            working with data coming from sensors based on a time window of 5 s.
                                  Most approaches in indoor positioning systems, such that trilateration or triangulation
                            only takes three to four sensors who recorded the maximum value of RSSI. With this
                            approach we are taking into account all sensors in the room. The algorithm considers the
                            set S of sensors as input, each sensor s ∈ S is given by its coordinates (xs , ys ) and its RSSI
                            value Ls , and computes a minimal zone as the representation of possible positions of the
                            individual. The algorithm iterates until a the optimal zone is reached. At each iteration
                            i, a new zone zonei is computed from the centroid of the zone issued from the previous
                            iteration and the RSSI values of each sensor s. The treatment is initialized with the first
                            zone zone0 defined as the convex hull of sensors within the room (Equation (1)):
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                            6 of 14




                                The MZS algorithm (Algorithm 1) starts by computing the convex hull of sensors
                            within the room, as explained in Equation (1), zone0 represents the initialization step.

                                                            zone0 = Hull ( xs , ys : sensors)                           (1)

                            The zone is then refined as the convex hull of a set of distance points, each distance points
                            Γs is computed from a sensor s and the value of Ls according to the centroïd c of the
                            previous convex hull: (Equations (2) and (3)).
                                                                                      
                                                                      xc        cos(αs )
                                                              Γs =       + Ls                                           (2)
                                                                      yc        sin(αs )

                            where we consider a set of sensors noted b described by their coordinate b : ( xs , ys ), and Ls
                            is a distance in meter computed based on the RSSI value returned by a sensor s at a time t.
                            The centroid C0 ( xc , yc ), αs the angle in radiant between the centroid C and sensor s. The
                            next execution (n=1), consider the convex hull of all Γs point and the new centroid C1 . The
                            iteration of the zone calculation is based on the following equation:

                                              zonei = Hull ({ DistancePoints( Ls , Czonei−1 ) : sensor s})              (3)

                            where Czonei−1 is the centroid of the zonei−1 and DistancePoints() is a direct reference to
                            Equation (2).

                              Algorithm 1: Minimal Zone Searching.
                                Input: A set of sensors S, each sensor s ∈ S is given with its position (xs ,ys ) and
                                       the distance Ls , A distance threshold D, A max nb of iteration M
                                Output: A minimal zone
                                init
                                    Hull ← {};
                                    Hull ← compute_hull(S);
                                   // At this point, the variable “Hull” corresponds to zone0
                                    centroid ← new_centroid ;
                                    nb_iter ← 0;
                                 repeat
                                    nb_iter + + ;
                                    centroid ← new_centroid ;
                                    li_DP ← [] ;
                                    forall s in S do
                                        Γs = DistancePoints( Ls , centroid) ;
                                        li_DP.push(Γs );
                                     Zone ← compute_hull (li_DP) ;
                                     new_centroid ← get_centroid( Zone);
                                 until computeDistance(centroid, new_centroid) > D nb_iter < M;
                                 return Zone

                                  The algorithm will stop when the size and position of zonei−1 and zonei are comparable
                            and where only minor changes occur, or if we reach the maximum number of executions,
                            i.e., when we obtain a small distance between two consecutive centroids. The threshold
                            value used in this paper is 0.1 m. Using the dataset from our experimentation, we observed
                            that the algorithm needs on average 6 iterations and 0.2 s of computation time to find a
                            “stable” zone, which is suitable for a real time execution.
                                  Figure 5 show a visual representation of an execution step, where Γ a , Γb , Γc and Γd
                            are respectively the distance points from sensor A, B, C and D. The figure shows the step
                            between execution n = 0 and n = 1 found in Figure 6.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                     7 of 14




                            Figure 5. Convex hull of actives sensors at n = 0.




                            Figure 6. Evolution of the MZS each n execution.

                            4. Results
                            4.1. Datasets Used
                                In this section, two datasets have been used. On each of those datasets, we used the
                            same data processing architecture as explained in Section 2.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                         8 of 14




                                 DS1: The first dataset is an open access dataset made by Mehdi Mohammadi et al.,
                            2017 [24]. This dataset is composed of BLE RSSI values emitted by 13 iBeacons and the
                            actual position of the user. As this dataset has a ground truth, it allows us to compute the
                            accuracy value of our method. DS1 has a “grid” placement. Table 1 is a description of the
                            dataset. The number of instances is the number of RSSI values for all sensors.

                            Table 1. Description of DS1.

                               Number of Sensors           Number of Instances   Placement     Duration      Frames
                                       13                         1420             Grid          8m33           33


                                  The limited number of instances from this dataset forces us to use a time window size
                            of 15 s. Indeed, to validate our approach we need at least 3 sensors returning an RSSI value
                            between the interval of time. This leaves us with 8 min and 33 s of data to process which is
                            limited but, the ground truth is a precious data, especially from an open access dataset.
                                  DS2: The second dataset is made of data collected during the museum experimenta-
                            tion. This experimentation of indoor positioning held within the museum of natural history
                            of La Rochelle. As museums are usually closed due to the pandemic, the experimentation
                            took place during a visit by students from a local high school.
                                  Figure 7 describe sensor placement within the museum. We equipped the largest
                            room in the building, and we get positional data when visitors were within this room.
                            The experiment began at ten in the morning and ended at noon. During those two hours,
                            subjects of the experimentation visited the museum freely. We do not have ground truth,
                            as this is not a dataset made and controlled by our team in our office, but “on the field”,
                            and following visitors could have changed their behavior. Finally, the three trajectories of
                            visitors where build based on 82,630 Bluetooth total footprints collected and process with
                            the methodology explains earlier, except we only consider intervals of time with a mean
                            RSSI value of at least −90 dB as explained in Section 2.




                            Figure 7. Placement of sensors within the museum.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                           9 of 14




                                 Table 2 show the number of sensors used, the total number of instances, the type of
                            placements and the number of subjects. Table 3 show a description of three subjects from
                            our experimentation. We should note that the number of instances is not an indicator for
                            the time spent in the studied rooms as show tag number 3, where from 24,414 instances,
                            we only got 3 min of exploitable data (3 sensors sending an RSSI value greater than −90 in
                            the same time window).

                            Table 2. Description of DS2.

                              Number of Sensors        Total Number of Instances    Placement     Number of Subjects
                                       8                         82,630            Disorganized            3



                            Table 3. Description of subjects for DS2.

                                  Tag Number               Number of Instances           Duration in Studied Room
                                        5                          26,701                         16 min
                                        8                          31,403                         22 min
                                        3                          24,414                         3 min


                            4.2. Experimentation on DS1
                            4.2.1. Visual Representation of MZS and the Ground Truth
                                 Figure 8 show a visual representation of the MZS algorithm on a “small portion” of
                            DS1. This “small portion” is composed of 15 frames fused together (4 min), in order to
                            better see the results returned by the MZS algorithm. The trajectory is deduced from the
                            reference point given by the author




                            Figure 8. MZS algorithm applied to DS1.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                            10 of 14




                            4.2.2. Comparison between MZS and Triangulation
                                  The ground truth from DS1 allows us to compute an accuracy indicator. The accuracy
                            parameter is computed by calculating the Euclidean distance from the returned zone to all
                            verified position points each 15 s, as we can have several points of this type per interval of
                            time. If the zone includes the point, the precision is set to 0.
                                  Table 4 shows the accuracy parameter computed for triangulation and MZS, the aver-
                            age and the standard deviation of size of calculated areas. The “frames computed” column
                            of Table 4 refers to the number of position estimation that could be computed.
                                  We can deduce that a typical “grid positional” arrangement of sensors is more suitable
                            for the triangulation as the accuracy is better than MZS.
                                  But we will see later that this method is vulnerable when the position of the sensors
                            are not ideal. This validation process shows that our algorithm still gives a pretty good
                            idea of the position of the user, even with an open access dataset.

                            Table 4. Accuracy values for MZS algorithm and triangulation applied to DS1.

                                                              Average for         Standard Deviation
                                 Method         Accuracy                                                Frames Computed
                                                               Zone Size             for Zone Size
                                  MSZ            0.74 m         0.49 m2                  0.85                   25
                              Triangulation      0.53 m         1.21   m2                0.95                   19


                            4.3. Experimentation on DS2
                            Importance of the Sensor Positions
                                 The MZS have, as it does not seek intersections between circles, a better accuracy
                            in often case when sensor placement is not optimal. Figure 9 show a situation when the
                            triangulation method doesn’t give the best result. The RSSI value is displayed next to the
                            sensor and the circle around them represent the value in meter of the RSSI value collected
                            by each sensor. It is a good example of how the sensor with the greatest value of RSSI,
                            (and thus indicate that a person is nearby) won’t intersect with any circle making the
                            triangulation method difficult.
                                 Figure 10 show the property of areas computed by both methods. This figure is a
                            result of the museum experimentation and is built based on three visitors wearings tags 5,
                            8 and 3. In this figure, we are looking at the size of areas with three metrics, the mean size
                            of the zone computed, the median and the standard variation (SD).
                                 Table 5 show on how many frames both methods could have been computed. A frame
                            is an interval of time of 5 s, where at least 2 sensors are returning an RSSI value and thus
                            that a person is in the equipped room.

                            Table 5. Number of frames processed by MZS and the triangulation.

                                 Badge             MZS              Triangulation               Total Number of Frames
                                    5               181                     135                          194
                                    8               254                     200                          263
                                    3               24                       5                           31


                                 In Table 5, we see that with tag number 5, 194 frames satisfy those conditions (Meaning
                            that this visitor spend approximately at least 16 min within the room). Tag number 8 get
                            263 exploitable frames (22 min) and tag number 3 get 31 meaning that the visitor probably
                            quickly passes this room.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                        11 of 14




                            Figure 9. Comparison between MZS and triangulation.




                            Figure 10. Properties of areas computed by both methods.

                            5. Discussion
                                 With this information in mind, Table 5 shows that the MZS algorithm is able to return a
                            positional area in most of the frames observed, more than the triangulation technique. Also,
                            the MZS gives a more stable result, with a lower value of standard variation. However, The
                            triangulation technique returns a smaller zone in comparison when we take the median.
                            The triangulation technique certainly targets a more accurate position of the user when the
                            target is stationary and unable to work properly when the subject is moving during the
                            five seconds intervals. Also, the position of sensors within the room is not optimized for
                            the triangulation algorithm and may play a big part in those results as situations describe
                            in Figure 9 lead to poor performances.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                            12 of 14




                                 In Figure 11 we show a visual representation of areas computed by both methods and
                            held as an illustration of data from Table 5 and more precisely the tag number 8. All areas
                            computed by those two algorithms are printed together on the same picture.




                            Figure 11. Visual comparison between triangulation and MZS , with data from tag number 8 in DS2.

                                 The MZS algorithm shows his strength on this figure: The localisation of the visitor in
                            the center of the room show comparable result between the two methods, but the difference
                            stand in the center to bottom left of the room. We see that the triangulation method show
                            poor result in tight spaces, where only few sensors are reachable. And thus, results returned
                            by the MZS algorithm are more exploitable and give a more meaningful view on the visit
                            of the subject.

                            6. Conclusions
                                  Indoor positioning services apply to museums offer new and promising ways to study
                            visitor behaviors. It can help the management of such facilities, in order to monitor visitor
                            paths and see what are the pieces they admire the most and what are the ones they miss.
                            Indeed, managers of museums are always looking for new ways to improve the visiting
                            experience, and are often worried that we will miss something during the tour.
                                  But those kind of place also bring architectural constrains in sensor placement, and as
                            we saw, sometime making algorithms such as the triangulation less effective. The MZS
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                                            13 of 14




                                   algorithm in other hand, as promising results as the position of sensors seems to have
                                   less impact, making it specifically useful in tight spaces. This kind of indoor positioning
                                   technique is still in an early stage of development, and improvement can still be made.
                                   An area for improvement can be the use of additional technique, such as trilateration,
                                   to reduce the tracking error. As the MZS algorithm seeks to get a zone and thus can be
                                   taken into account with another method, but if used alone, only return a zone, making
                                   accurate positional representation difficult. Sensor placement can indeed have a huge
                                   impact on accuracy and performances on various techniques, and it’s something that
                                   should be considered more carefully as studies shown [25,26].
                                         BLE remains a reference signal in the field of indoor positioning and make experimen-
                                   tation as the one described in this paper easier and do not need a lot of materials to be
                                   efficient and can alone give a rough idea of the position of a visitor, even in real time.
                                         Finally, we can also add that indoor positioning systems in most cases do not need
                                   a complex algorithm, often too heavy to be processed by a smartphone or too difficult to
                                   implement. Studies such as [27–29],
                                         shows in different ways the use of the architecture and room’s layout of a building.
                                   Thus, the search for maximum accuracy become less relevant, when we know where the
                                   user can and cannot be, and what path could he follow. Therefore, the robustness of a
                                   method should be more valuable than its accuracy.

                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.J.; methodology, R.J.; software, R.J.; validation, B.K.
                                   and F.C.; formal analysis, R.J.; investigation, B.K., F.C.; resources, R.J., B.K., F.C.; data curation,
                                   R.J.; writing—original draft preparation, R.J.; writing—review and editing, B.K.; visualization, R.J.;
                                   supervision, B.K., F.C.; project administration, B.K., F.C.; funding acquisition, B.K., F.C. All authors
                                   have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research was funded by Berger-Levrault and the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region, under
                                   the DA3T project number 2018-1R40225 And The APC was funded by the L3I Laboratory.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
                                   study.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Public dataset (DS1) used in the article: 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2712560
                                   The other dataset (DS2) come from an experimentation.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Zafari, F.; Gkelias, A.; Leung, K.K. A Survey of Indoor Localization Systems and Technologies. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2019,
      21, 2568–2599. [CrossRef]
2.    Piccinni, G.; Avitabile, G.; Coviello, G. An improved technique based on Zadoff-Chu sequences for distance measurements. In
      Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Radio and Antenna Days of the Indian Ocean (RADIO), Reunion, France, 10–13 October 2016;
      pp. 1–2. [CrossRef]
3.    Piccinni, G.; Avitabile, G.; Coviello, G.; Talarico, C. Real-Time Distance Evaluation System for Wireless Localization. IEEE Trans.
      Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. 2020, 67, 3320–3330. [CrossRef]
4.    Luo, R.C.; Hsiao, T.J. Dynamic Wireless Indoor Localization Incorporating With an Autonomous Mobile Robot Based on an
      Adaptive Signal Model Fingerprinting Approach. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2019, 66, 1940–1951. [CrossRef]
5.    Farid, Z.; Nordin, R.; Ismail, M. Recent Advances in Wireless Indoor Localization Techniques and System. J. Comput. Netw.
      Commun. 2013, 2013, 185138. [CrossRef]
6.    Liu, H.; Darabi, H.; Banerjee, P.; Liu, J. Survey of Wireless Indoor Positioning Techniques and Systems. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
      Cybern. Part C (Appl. Rev.) 2007, 37, 1067–1080. [CrossRef]
7.    Conte, G.; de Marchi, M.; Nacci, A.A.; Rana, V.; Sciuto, D. BlueSentinel: A first approach using iBeacon for an energy efficient
      occupancy detection system. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Conference on Embedded Systems for Energy-Efficient Buildings
      (BuildSys’14), Memphis, TN, USA, 3–6 November 2014; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2014;
      pp. 11–19. [CrossRef]
8.    Yoshimura, Y.; Sobolevsky, S.; Ratti, C.; Girardin, F.; Carrascal, J.P.; Blat, J.; Sinatra, R. An Analysis of Visitors’ Behavior in the
      Louvre Museum: A Study Using Bluetooth Data. Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 2014, 41, 1113–1131. [CrossRef]
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6107                                                                                                         14 of 14




9.    Spachos, P.; Plataniotis, K.N. BLE Beacons for Indoor Positioning at an Interactive IoT-Based Smart Museum. IEEE Syst. J. 2020,
      14, 3483–3493. [CrossRef]
10.   Giuliano, R.; Cardarilli, G.C.; Cesarini, C.; di Nunzio, L.; Fallucchi, F.; Fazzolari, R.; Mazzenga, F.; Re, M.; Vizzarri, A. Indoor
      Localization System Based on Bluetooth Low Energy for Museum Applications. Electronics 2020, 9, 1055. [CrossRef]
11.   Juniarta, N.; Couceiro, M.; Napoli, A.; Raïssi, C. Sequential Pattern Mining using FCA and Pattern Structures for Analyzing
      Visitor Trajectories in a Museum. In Proceedings of the CLA 2018—The 14th International Conference on Concept Lattices and
      Their Applications, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 12–14 June 2018.
12.   Kontarinis, A.; Marinica, C.; Vodislav, D.; Zeitouni, K.; Krebs, A.; Kotzinos, D. Towards a Better Understanding of Museum
      Visitors’ Behavior through Indoor Trajectory Analysis. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Digital
      Presentation and Preservation of Cultural and Scientific Heritage (DiPP2017), Burgas, Bulgaria, 7–9 September 2017; pp. 19–30.
13.   Belmonte-Hernández, A.; Hernández-Peñaloza, G.; Gutiérrez, D.M.; Álvarez, F. SWiBluX: Multi-Sensor Deep Learning Fingerprint
      for Precise Real-Time Indoor Tracking. IEEE Sens. J. 2019, 19, 3473–3486. [CrossRef]
14.   Wenger, M.; Carrera, J.; Zhao, Z. Indoor positioning using Raspberry Pi with UWB. Bachelor’s Thesis, Universität Bern, Bern,
      Switzerland, 2019.
15.   Choi, M.; Beakcheol, J. An accurate fingerprinting based indoor positioning algorithm. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 2017, 12, 86–90.
16.   Subedi, S.; Kwon, G.; Shin, S.; Hwang, S.; Pyun, J.Y. Beacon based indoor positioning system using weighted centroid localization
      approach. In Proceedings of the 2016 Eighth International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), Vienna,
      Austria, 5–8 July 2016; pp. 1016–1019. [CrossRef]
17.   Dong, Q.; Dargie, W. Evaluation of the reliability of RSSI for indoor localization. In Proceedings of the 2012 International
      Conference on Wireless Communications in Underground and Confined Areas, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 28–30 August 2012;
      pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
18.   Li, G.; Geng, E.; Ye, Z.; Xu, Y.; Lin, J.; Pang, Y. Indoor Positioning Algorithm Based on the Improved RSSI Distance Model. Sensors
      2018, 18, 2820. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.   Wang, Y.; Yang, X.; Zhao, Y.; Liu, Y.; Cuthbert, L. Bluetooth positioning using RSSI and triangulation methods. In Proceedings of
      the 2013 IEEE 10th Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 11–14 January 2013;
      pp. 837–842. [CrossRef]
20.   Pradhan, S.; Bae, Y.; Pyun, J.Y.; Ko, N.Y.; Hwang, S. Hybrid TOA Trilateration Algorithm Based on Line Intersection and
      Comparison Approach of Intersection Distances. Energies 2019, 12, 1668. [CrossRef]
21.   Cantón Paterna, V.; Calveras Augé, A.; Paradells Aspas, J.; Pérez Bullones, M.A. A Bluetooth Low Energy Indoor Positioning
      System with Channel Diversity, Weighted Trilateration and Kalman Filtering. Sensors 2017, 17, 2927. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.   He, S.; Hu, T.; Chan, S.-H.G. Contour-based Trilateration for Indoor Fingerprinting Localization. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
      Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys’15), Delft, The Netherlands, 6–8 November 2015; Association for
      Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2015; pp. 225–238. [CrossRef]
23.   Dinh, T.-M.T.; Duong, N.-S.; Sandrasegaran, K. Smartphone-Based Indoor Positioning Using BLE iBeacon and Reliable
      Lightweight Fingerprint Map. IEEE Sens. J. 2020, 20, 10283–10294. [CrossRef]
24.   Mohammadi, M.; Al-Fuqaha, A.; Guizani, M.; Oh, J. Semi-supervised Deep Reinforcement Learning in Support of IoT and Smart
      City Services. IEEE Internet Things J. 2017, 5, 624–635. [CrossRef]
25.   Rezazadeh, J.; Subramanian, R.; Sandrasegaran, K.; Kong, X.; Moradi, M.; Khodamoradi, F. Novel iBeacon Placement for Indoor
      Positioning in IoT. IEEE Sens. J. 2018, 18, 10240–10247. [CrossRef]
26.   Sharma, R.; Badarla, V. Geometrical Optimization of A Novel Beacon Placement Strategy for 3D Indoor Localization. In
      Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), Indore,
      India, 16–19 December 2018; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
27.   Ramadhan, H.; Yustiawan, Y.; Kwon, J. Applying Movement Constraints to BLE RSSI-Based Indoor Positioning for Extracting
      Valid Semantic Trajectories. Sensors 2020, 20, 527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Abdelnasser, H.; Mohamed, R.; Elgohary, A.; Alzantot, M.F.; Wang, H.; Sen, S.; Choudhury, R.R.; Youssef, M. SemanticSLAM:
      Using Environment Landmarks for Unsupervised Indoor Localization. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2016, 15, 1770–1782. [CrossRef]
29.   Kontarinis, A.; Zeitouni, K.; Marinica, C.; Vodislav, D.; Kotzinos, D. Towards a semantic indoor trajectory model: Application to
      museum visits. Geoinformatica 2021, 25, 311–352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
