Smarter Phones

Indoor Positioning
and Navigation
with Camera Phones
This low-cost indoor navigation system uses off-the-shelf camera
phones to determine user location in real time by detecting unobtrusive
fiduciary markers.

G

PS-based navigation systems
have become very popular,
mainly because they let people
rapidly explore unknown areas.
However, GPS works only outdoors, because the required satellite links are
blocked or unreliable inside buildings. For
indoor location sensing, many types of sensors
exist, including ultrasonic, infrared, magnetic,
and radio sensors. But they all require a permanent electronic infrastructure
Alessandro Mulloni,
to facilitate measurements,
Daniel Wagner,
and localizable objects relyand Dieter Schmalstieg
ing on this infrastructure need
Graz University of Technology
special sensors or actuators.
Practical problems such as
Istvan Barakonyi
power consumption, wiring,
Imagination Computer
and overall infrastructure
Services GesmbH
cost have inhibited such technology’s deployment in entire
buildings.
In previous work,1 we demonstrated how
to detect and decode square fiduciary markers in real time using off-the-shelf camera
phones. Such markers contain a 2D barcode
that provides a unique ID from the camera
image, which the camera phone can use to estimate in real time its position and orientation
relative to the marker. The indoor navigation
system we describe in this article takes advantage of associating locations with markers to provide an inexpensive, building-wide

22 PER VA SI V E computing

orientation guide that relies solely on camera
phones. Whereas previous work on barcodebased location tracking, such as QR Codes
(www.qrcode.com), relies on non-real-time
“snapshot” processing, our approach allows
for continuously scanning an environment in
real time (15 Hz or more) in search of navigation hints. Thus, navigation scales from
sparse, strategically placed fiduciary markers
to continuous navigation in 3D.
Real-time marker-based tracking of position
is available in several desktop-based applications, but it has only recently become available
in phones. Consequently, systems for continuous navigation using marker-based tracking
haven’t been studied extensively. Non-real-time
marker-based recognition in existing locationbased services usually takes several seconds, and
the service providers typically place markers to
highlight a particular location rather than to act
as pure navigation landmarks (see the “Indoor
Navigation and Localization” sidebar).
We’ve examined marker-based tracking’s
suitability for continuous navigation in mobile
phones. We conducted a controlled user study
to compare our system with a map without localization and with a GPS-like real-time localization. In this article, we provide an evaluation
of subjective experiences about ease of use and
location awareness. We also discuss experiences
from deploying our software at four large-scale
events, testing its usability under real-world con-

Published by the IEEE CS n 1536-1268/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE

Indoor Navigation and Localization

T

here is a large body of work on indoor navigation in robotics. Guilherme DeSouza and Avinash Kak provide a good
overview.1 These systems commonly harness a robot’s controlled
position and movements and try to detect its pose using naturalfeature tracking based on cameras or range sensors. However,
such algorithms exceed what is currently possible on mobile
phones.
Among the first dedicated wearable location systems was Active Badge,2 which consisted of infrared badges sending location
information signals to a server. Its successor, the Bat system,3
used ultrasonic location estimation to provide more accurate
position data. Another system for location tracking, PlaceLab,4
used signal strength of various wireless connections such as GSM
(Global System for Mobile Communications), Bluetooth, and WiFi. Accuracy strongly depended on the number of senders in the
environment and ranged from 3 to 6 meters for indoor use. For a
good overview of positioning technologies, see the survey by Jeffrey Hightower and Gaetano Borriello.5
Cyberguide was an early project targeting human indoor
navigation and guidance.6 It used remote controls as low-cost
infrared beacons, but the cost of the remote controls prevented
deployment in larger areas or large numbers of users. The
eGuide project and the Resource-Adaptive Mobile Navigation
System use similar techniques.7,8 Davide Merico and Roberto Bisiani use inertial sensors to track user movements.9 Periodically,
users must calibrate their position by choosing distance measurements in panoramic views of the environment on the device’s
screen. Naturally, creating these views is work intensive for large
areas. Harlan Hile and Gaetano Borriello report an indoor navigation system based on the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT)
method.10 This system relies on a server to outsource the actual
pose estimation work, providing limited scalability and long
latency—a processing time of roughly 10 seconds per image
makes this system unsuitable for large-scale deployment.
Recently, Tsutomu Miyashita and his colleagues presented a
PC-based museum guide using natural-feature tracking.11 As

ditions. Both evaluations suggest that
marker-based navigation with camera
phones works well and fits real-world
requirements.

Human-Friendly
Fiduciary Markers
Localization using fiduciary markers is
a well-established mechanism in mobile
applications. Unlike natural-feature
tracking, detecting and decoding artifi-

April–june 2009

with our system, localization works on only certain hot spots. But
the markerless tracking approach makes it difficult for visitors to
recognize those hot spots.

References
1. G.N. DeSouza and A.C. Kak, “Vision for Mobile Robot Navigation:
A Survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Feb.
2002, pp. 237–267.
2.	R. Want et al., “The Active Badge Location System,” ACM Trans. Information Systems, Jan. 1992, pp. 91–102.
3. M. Addlesee et al., “Implementing a Sentient Computing System,”
Computer, Aug. 2001, pp. 50–56.
4. V. Otsason et al., “Accurate GSM Indoor Localization,” Proc. Int’l
Symp. Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp 05), LNCS 3660, Springer,
2005, pp. 141–158.
5.	J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Location Systems for Ubiquitous
Computing,” Computer, Aug. 2001, pp. 57–66.
6. G.D. Abowd et al., “Cyberguide: A Mobile Context-Aware Tour
Guide,” Wireless Networks, Oct. 1997, pp. 421–433.
7.	J.L. Encarnação and T. Kirste, “Beyond the Desktop: Natural Interaction and Intelligent Assistance for the Everyday Life,” Proc. Computer
Graphik Topics, 2000, pp. 16–19 (in German).
8.	J. Baus, A. Kruger, and W. Wahlster, “A Resource-Adaptive Mobile
Navigation System,” Proc. 7th Int’l Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI
02), ACM Press, 2002, pp. 15–22.
9. D. Merico and R. Bisiani, “Indoor Navigation with Minimal Infrastructure,” Proc. 4th Workshop Positioning, Navigation and Communication (WPNC 07), IEEE Press, 2007, pp. 141–144.
10. H. Hile and G. Borriello, “Information Overlay for Camera Phones in
Indoor Environments,” Proc. 3rd Int’l Symp. Location- and ContextAwareness (LoCA 07), LNCS 4718, Springer, 2007, pp. 68–84.
11. T. Miyashita et al., “An Augmented Reality Museum Guide,” Proc. 7th
IEEE/ACM Int’l Symp. Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR 08), IEEE
Press, 2008, pp. 103–106.

cial markers is highly robust and works
well under varying lighting conditions
and with minimal computational resources. Moreover, fiduciary markers’
unusual visual appearance makes them
more noticeable, helping users identify
information hot spots in visually cluttered environments as well as large environments where interest points are
sparse. For example, the Yellow Arrow project (http://yellowarrow.net)

encourages users to place highly visible
stickers with barcodes worldwide, each
linking to online content.
Our marker-tracking software library can estimate, with 6 degrees of
freedom (DOF), a camera phone’s position and orientation with respect to
markers. Because maps are only 2D
representations of the world, we can
limit the localization to use only 3 DOF,
sufficient to estimate the phone’s 2D

PER VA SI V E computing 23

Smarter Phones

Figure 1. Development of fiduciary
markers and conference posters at
(a) the 2007 Microsoft Mobile and
Embedded Developers Conference
(MEDC 2007) and (b) Microsoft’s
TechReady7; and (c) use of our
localization system at TechReady7.

position and orientation. This makes
our system more practical to deploy
because marker positions and orientations need only be specified in 2D.
We deployed traditional square
markers at the 2007 Microsoft Mobile
and Embedded Developers Conference
(MEDC 2007), as Figure 1a shows.
Over time, we introduced a new type
of less visually obtrusive markers called
frame markers (see Figure 1b). Frame
markers encode the same amount of
data (36 bits) as traditional square
markers, but they arrange the data
along the border: 9 bits are encoded
at each marker side in small black and
white squares, carrying 1 bit each. The
frame marker’s specifications arrange
the code in clockwise order such that
only one of the four possible rotations
yields a valid code. The remaining part
of the square isn’t used to decode the
marker and can contain arbitrary content, giving graphics designers freedom
for customization.
To exploit markers, users must point
the phone’s camera at them (see Figure
1c). As soon as a marker appears in the
camera’s view, the system detects and
decodes it in real time from the live
video stream. For detection to succeed,
each square describing a bit should be
at least 2 pixels in the camera image.
Our system can cope with tilt angles of
up to roughly 70 degrees, and rotations
around the camera’s optical axis don’t
affect the system. These constraints
are comparable to other marker-based
tracking techniques.

Conference Guide Application
Large events such as conferences often
challenge participants to find their way
through vast multistory convention cen-

24

PER VA SI V E computing 

ters or hotels. Using our marker-tracking
technology, we created a location-based
conference guide called Signpost. We
designed this application to work with
sparse tracking, to limit the number of
deployed markers to a manageable size.
For example, we installed 37 markers at
a conference site in the Venetian Hotel
Las Vegas in April 2007, in an area of
roughly 100 m × 200 m.
Although 6-DOF tracking can deliver
centimeter-level accuracy when markers are tracked, presenting only the 2D
location on a map reduces accuracy
requirements significantly. This is important because conference organizers
must consider the logistics of deploying and inspecting marker placement.
The most efficient way, developed after
consulting conference organizers, was
to stick markers onto poster stands,
which could be quickly deployed on site
at preplanned locations (see Figure 1c).
Signpost combines a conference calendar and a navigation system. Users
can query the conference calendar by
day or conference session, or by using
full-text indexing. Live RSS updates
received over the air ensure that the
schedule reflects the latest changes. All
calendar entries are linked to locations,
so users can plan their fastest route
from the current location (the last seen
marker) to the desired lecture hall. Signpost displays the results on a map that
users can freely pan, rotate, and zoom.
Alternatively, in live-tracking mode, the
system automatically aligns the map as
soon as a marker is detected.
We implemented Signpost atop the
Studierstube ES (Embedded Systems)
framework,1 as Figure 2 shows. The system runs on Windows Mobile phones
(Figure 3), independent of screen resolution and form factor. Signpost can
impact the device’s battery life, mainly
because of its use of the camera and the
network connection. However, when
no one is using the Signpost application, the system automatically disables
the camera. Hence, battery drain is limited to when users actively interact with
the application. Furthermore, Signpost

www.computer.org/pervasive

Application

Signpost

Studierstube
scene graph
Studierstube ES

• Create a map and database of marker
locations. On the basis of sketches
or CAD data, create one or more
2D images using maps of the target
location. The system uses bitmaps
rather than vector graphics images

Muddleware

Studierstube I/O

Studierstube tracker

Studierstube core

Operating systems

Windows, Windows Mobile,
Symbian, Mac OS, Linus

Studierstube math

APIs

DirectShow, Symbian Camera, OpenMAX, Direct3D,
OpenGL ES (1.x, 2.x), OpenGL, Winsock, and so on

Hardware

Platform

uses the network connection only when
users explicitly ask to update the conference schedule.
For large events in venues with multiple levels or buildings, a single map
is no longer sufficient. Signpost, therefore, supports multiple maps linked
to a 3D overview or, alternatively, an
interactive 3D representation showing
the current and target locations’ global
geographic relationship.
Deploying the system to a new location consists of three steps:

Studierstube software stack

Figure 2. Software architecture
of the mobile phone client. Our
software framework, Studierstube ES,
provides the application layer with an
abstraction of all platform-dependent
functionalities, allowing for an easier
cross-platform development of
applications.

(CPU, GPU, FPU, display, touch screen, buttons, audio, camera, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth)

ES: Embedded Systems

FPU: floating-point unit GPU: graphics processing unit

for the maps, allowing reuse of existing maps and artworks. On the basis
of gatherable information from the

2D maps, select preliminary marker
locations and orientations and enter
them into a configuration file. This

Figure 3. Examples of phones running Signpost and screenshots of the application: (a) HTC Cingular 8525, (b) Orange SPV E600,
(c) HTC Touch Diamond, (d) HTC S710, and (e) Motorola Q. Signpost supports various form factors and resolutions of the screen,
and different input capabilities (both keypad- and touch-based).

April–june 2009

PER VA SI V E computing 25

Smarter Phones

Figure 4. Positioning marker-based localization systems on an ideal localization continuum. This continuum spans from systems
without localization to those with continuous localization.

step can take place offline in a planning office without access to the target location.
• Deploy markers on site. During event
preparations, deploy markers on site.
Depending on the required accuracy,
a coarse deployment (± 50 cm) is often sufficient. For simplicity, markers’ horizontal bearing is restricted to
45-degree steps, which is usually sufficient when mounting them on walls
or poster boards. For those markers
that can’t be deployed as planned in
the previous step, update the database accordingly.
• Create a new software release. Finally, create a new software release
by bundling the software with the
updated map and marker database.
Changes to this data (such as repositioning markers or changes to the
schedule) that become necessary later
can be deployed over the air.
We envisioned a typical usage pattern
to be as follows: First, a user browses
the schedule, choosing a desired talk.
Second, by selecting this talk, the user
can see its location on the map. Third,
when Signpost detects a marker, the application shows the user’s current position, helping the user to decide how to
reach the talk. Fourth, if desired, the

26

PER VA SI V E computing 

user can get a better understanding of
the conference complex by looking at
the 3D view.

Comparison
of Localization Techniques
Even though many projects have used
marker recognition, we aren’t aware of
any studies that compare marker-based
localization with nonlocalized digital
maps. So, we conducted a study to assess whether the effort of outfitting the
environment with fiduciary markers
pays off in terms of improvements in
user navigation. We compared markerbased navigation in Signpost with two
conditions that represent the extremes
of the localization continuum, shown
in Figure 4: a digital map with no localization and a system with continuous
real-time localization (similar to GPSbased navigation systems).
We hypothesized that the continuous
localization system is significantly easier to use than the other systems, while
providing the highest degree of location awareness. We also hypothesized
that discrete localization is significantly
more helpful in terms of location awareness than the no-localization condition,
while probably requiring more learning
effort. The study’s overall goal was to
show that marker-based localization is

a good solution for navigation when no
GPS positioning is available.
We recruited 20 users with diverse
cultural backgrounds and varying expertise in technology. The users were
between 20 and 34 years old (average
age of 25), with half male and half female. For each of the three conditions,
we asked the participants to use the
maps and the localization system as
their only aids to reach a specific destination. The location of the study was
the Department of Computer Science
at Graz University of Technology (in
Graz, Austria)—a complex comprising four buildings connected by several
bridges. This complex contains many
repeated features, with a general lack of
clear landmarks. We considered it to be
a significant example of a hard case for
navigation in a new environment. To
avoid biased results, we ensured that no
user had previous experience with the
buildings. We selected three different
destinations, balancing their difficulty
in terms of distance from the starting
point, bridges to cross, and number
of floors. The study used a withinsubjects design (all test users tried all
three conditions) with randomization
(based on Latin squares) of the order of
conditions and target rooms to avoid
bias. We gave all users some time to famil-

www.computer.org/pervasive

No localization

Marker-based
localization

Continuous
localization

Criteria
(1)

Criteria

(1)

(2)

No localization vs.
p < 0.05 p = 0.945
marker-based
localization

(3)

(4)

p < 0.01

p < 0.001

(2)
No localization vs.
p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001
continuous
localization

(3)

Marker-based
localization vs.
continuous
localization

(4)
0

(a)

0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
Average ranking

2.5

3.0

3.5

p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001 p < 0.001

Statiscally significant

Not statiscally significant

(b)

Figure 5. Subjective rankings of the three localization systems, based on four different criteria: (a) average ranking of the three
localization systems (higher scores indicate better ratings); (b) statistical significance of pair-wise differences (as a result of
Bonferroni post hoc analysis). The criteria were as follows: (1) the system is easy to use, (2) the system is easy to learn, (3) the
system requires little attention, and (4) the system makes me confident I know where I am. Horizontal lines indicate 95 percent
confidence intervals.

iarize themselves with the touch-screenbased application before starting the
evaluation.
For the no-localization condition,
we implemented a digital map viewer,
which lets users pan the maps with a
finger on the touch screen. In all conditions, each map showed the start and
destination points with crosshairs.
When such locations were outside the
map’s view, we presented off-screen
directions using labeled arrows. Users
could access each floor’s maps using
keypad shortcuts on the phone.
For discrete localization, we integrated our marker-based solution into
the navigation map and presented the
live camera video view in a screen corner. The map presented each marker’s
position as a red dot. As soon as the
system detected a marker, it automatically updated the user’s detected position and orientation, presenting it as a
labeled icon on the map. However, it
didn’t reposition and reorient the map
itself automatically. Our pilot study revealed that users prefer to rotate and
center the map manually when using a
system that doesn’t provide continuous
localization.

April–june 2009

For the continuous-localization condition, we didn’t have an indoor equivalent to GPS available. Therefore, we
used a “Wizard of Oz” approach: we
introduced a hidden operator to manually control the map’s position and rotation using a second phone connected
via Bluetooth. A crosshair on the map
showed the user’s current position.
This setup proved to be believable, and
the users sufficiently concentrated on
their devices such that no one noticed
the trick. Continuous localization was
a control condition useful only for
comparison within our experiment,
and the Wizard of Oz approach let us
quickly build a running system. Even
if this solution can’t scale to real-world
situations, we considered its scope to
be limited to the described user study.
After users completed all three
tasks, we asked them to rank the three
conditions from worst to best, according to four different criteria: ease of
use, ease of learning, required attention, and confidence about the current
location. For each rating, we assigned
a score of 1 to the worst condition and
3 to the best condition. Figure 5 shows
the average rankings and their 95 per-

cent confidence intervals. Friedman’s
test shows that the effect is significant
for every criterion (p < 0.001), with
a high probability that differences in
scores aren’t due to chance. Figure 5
also shows the results of the Bonferroni test for post hoc analysis.
As expected, the continuous-localization condition outperformed the
other two conditions for all criteria.
Surprisingly, though, users found discrete localization significantly easier
to use than no localization, while requiring less attention. During the user
study, we noticed that the localization information provided by markers helped users mentally register the
view on the digital map with the real
environment. Although in the no-localization condition users looked for
matching landmarks in the environment with landmarks on the map, with
discrete localization, the burden was
reduced to registering the icon on the
map with the user’s real position and
orientation in the world. This might
explain the ease of use reported for
discrete localization. The results show
no significant difference in the ease of
learning between the two conditions,

PER VA SI V E computing 27

Smarter Phones

Average ratings on 7-point Likert scale
Questions

0

1

Signpost was more useful than a
conventional map.

5

6

7

Q3

I was able to quickly access and understand the
information (schedule and map) I searched for.

Q4
Q5

I enjoyed using Signpost2007.
Signpost2007 improved my location
awareness.

Q6

Signpost2007 should be used on other
events too.

Q7

(b)

although discrete localization scored
slightly worse than no localization. In
our application, we address markerrelated learnability problems by introducing video tutorials or by providing
on-screen hints (for instance, viewfinder frames, which are common in
photo cameras).
Finally, user confidence was significantly higher (p < 0.001) for discrete
(marker-based) localization compared
to no localization. Thus, compared to
a static map, users appear to feel a significant increase of location awareness
when provided with a means of verifying their position on the map, even
if coarse and discrete. Our observations during the user study support this
conclusion. Although users generally
didn’t use markers intensively when
they were going in the right direction,
markers seemed fundamental for users
who were lost in a wrong branch of the
building so that they could remap their
mental model with the real building
and restructure their path accordingly.

Experiences from
Real-World Deployment
We deployed Signpost at four international conferences: MEDC 2007

PER VA SI V E computing 

4

Q2

I'd like to see the other users' positions
on my device too.

28

3
Q1

Those black-and-white markers
disturbed me.

(a)

2

(April 2007), Microsoft Tech Ed
2007 (June 2007), TechReady6 (February 2008) and TechReady7 (July
2008). The number of distinct users
that installed Signpost on their devices rose from 150 at MEDC 2007
to more than 1,000 at TechReady6.
To our knowledge, this is the most
widely used phone-based indoor navigation system ever deployed in a real
environment.
At all four conferences, we introduced Signpost as the official conference guide endorsed by the conference
organizer. All users were conference
attendees who hadn’t seen the application beforehand and who didn’t know
us. By deploying our application in
previously unknown environments
and with a large user base possessing untested hardware, we were able
to collect data from many users in a
natural environment via anonymous
usage logs, questionnaires, on-field
observations, and interviews. These
real-world experiments complement the controlled study presented
earlier.
Unfortunately, approaching all users directly wasn’t possible. Yet, we
managed to interview some of them

Figure 6. Results of 34 anonymous
questionnaires from MEDC 2007: (a)
questions given, and (b) average ratings
for each question on a 7-point Likert
scale. The vertical lines indicate the 95
percent confidence intervals.

personally and to collect questionnaires and usage logs from many of
them. Our overall aim was to determine how useful attendees found the
application. More specifically, we
wanted to learn what worked and
what didn’t, and which features were
appreciated and which were missing.
We also wanted to gain insight into
other research areas, such as pedestrian navigation.
During MEDC 2007, we collected
34 anonymous questionnaires. Attendees marked their answers on a
Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree)
to 7 (strongly agree). Figure 6 presents
the results. All answers were consistent, with only a minimal standard
deviation.
At TechEd 2007, we deployed the
application at the request of the conference organizers, but we didn’t manage to get in contact with any of the
conference attendees.
At TechReady6, we systematically
observed selected users to monitor
their behavior patterns, and we performed recorded, semistructured interviews afterward. The interviews
focused on several core topics, such as
how Signpost changed the user’s conference experience and organization,
how well the navigation worked, and
how much the small screen limited the
application’s usefulness.
Finally, during TechReady7, we
collected usage logs from 74 anonymous users, covering a time frame of
four days, to better understand how
users employed Signpost. We identified the following core functions: display of 2D maps, visualization of the
conference buildings’ 3D models, live
positioning using markers, browsing
of the conference schedule, and full-

www.computer.org/pervasive

Figure 7. Usage statistics for five core
functionalities (from TechReady7): (a)
percentage of times each functionality
was invoked, and (b) average usage
count of each functionality per user
(relative to the days since the user first
ran the application).

Figure 8. Distribution of ratings on the
usefulness of functionalities (compared
to the printed conference handouts at
TechReady7). All values are oriented
toward positive ones (“useful”), but the
ratings for the 3D model seem to be
more spread and generally centered on
“slightly useful.”

April–june 2009

2D map (38%)

3D model
(11%)

(a)
4.0
3.5
3.0
Usage count per user

Usefulness
At MEDC 2007, attendees found
Signpost more useful than the conventional conference map that was part
of the printed conference booklet (Figure 6a, Q1). At TechReady6, all subjects agreed that the application was
very helpful. One user said, “Everything I looked for, I used the schedule.
I used the map, since I didn’t know
where to go in the Hyatt; that was very
helpful.” From the questionnaires at
TechReady7, we can also see generally high rates for Signpost’s usefulness. Most users quickly accessed the
information presented on their device
(Q4). Users consistently enjoyed the
application (Q5), yielding an average
score of 6.6 out of 7. Furthermore, the

Full-text
search
(6%)

Live position
(27%)

2D map
Browse schedule
3D model
Full-text search
Live position

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

1

(b)

70

2
3
4
Time since user first ran the application (days)

5

Useless
Slightly useless
Neutral
Slightly useful
Useful

60
Frequency of rating (%)

text search on the conference schedule. Figure 7a shows the percentage
of times users invoked the various
functions. At TechReady7, we also
collected questionnaires from 64
users. In this questionnaire, users
rated the usefulness of the five core
functions compared with the printed
conference booklet, on a Likert scale
from 1 (useless) to 5 (useful), as Figure 8 shows.
In the following, we discuss the experiences gained throughout the four
conferences.

Browse schedule
(18%)

50
40
30
20
10
0

2D map

3D model

Live position Browse schedule Full-text search
Functionality

PER VA SI V E computing 29

Smarter Phones

attendees strongly believed that Signpost should be used at other conferences as well (Q7), resulting in a score
of 6.5 out of 7.
3D Overview Map
Overall, people found the 3D overview not very helpful. For example,
one user at TechReady6 said, “It is
cool. It is eye-candy, but for me it
is not helpful. The 2D map is just
fine.” Another said, “It was interesting, but I didn’t use it to try to find
where I was going. I think the model
is too simplistic.” This trend is also
evident from the TechReady7 data,
where the 3D functionality’s usage
was very low, and the ratings for its
usefulness were generally centered
on 4 (“slightly useful”). A likely
reason for this is that the conference area was too large. It spanned
an area of four buildings, each with
two to six levels. Still, all users voted
to keep the 3D view, because of its
“eye-candy” factor or because it gave
them a better large-scale overview of
the environment.
Small Screen
Most users had no problems seeing the overview, despite the small
screen size, and they made comments such as, “That is perfect. I
wouldn’t want to carry something
bigger” or “I’d rather use my phone
because I am used to [looking] at the

Navigation
To minimize the workload of adapting to new locations, we didn’t design Signpost to provide textual
navigation instructions. Although
users generally liked the way Signpost guided them, there were many
suggestions for improvements. For
example, one user said, “I think the
biggest thing that would help me was
if it would tell me steps: go down escalator, turn right ... like some of the
car navigation things, but maybe not
that precise.” As we expected from
the controlled user study, users generally felt an improvement in their location awareness (Q6).
Tracking Accuracy
Although the marker-tracking system
was quite precise, we decided to mount
the markers only coarsely, to minimize
the effort of mounting and measuring.
Yet, users were generally satisfied with
the tracking accuracy: “When I looked
at it—immediately I thought wow, this
is where I am.” One user referred to
the tracking accuracy as “half a meter,
for the purpose it was accurate enough
… 2 feet off the door versus 4 feet off
the door really doesn’t matter.”
Fiduciary Markers
Using fiduciary markers in public areas always raises questions concerning
visual clutter. However, most attendees didn’t complain about the mark-

Although users generally liked
the way Signpost guided them, there
were many suggestions for improvements.
small screen anyway.” Yet, another
user said “Getting an overview is the
toughest part, in the level of detail
that is required.” As expected, some
users found it difficult to browse a
big map. Interestingly, this seemed
to wear off as users gained a better
feeling for the site.

30

PER VA SI V E computing 

ers, giving Q2 (“Those black-andwhite markers disturbed me.”) a score
of 1.7. Perhaps fiduciary markers don’t
affect conference sites, which are already densely decorated with posters
and screens, as much as other environments. At the first two conferences, the
markers looked like a checkerboard

with a black border (see Figure 1). In
addition, they were mounted on special poster boards, so they were easy
to spot. For TechReady6, we introduced the frame markers, branded
with the design of the conference. Although they looked significantly more
pleasing, they were far more difficult
to spot. For TechReady7, we corrected this problem by using a different color scheme. At TechReady6 and
TechReady7, the conference organizers
deployed only 24 markers over an area
of four buildings. Although the markers were placed prominently, they were
small (15 cm). Surprisingly, all users
commented that enough markers were
available.
Privacy
With a system like Signpost, it would
be possible to store all users’ current
positions on a central server. Q3 asked
about the users’ interest in seeing other
users on their screen. Here, we noticed
the highest variation among answers.
Discussions with users confirmed our
expectations that some users have
concerns about their privacy being affected by such a feature. One user said,
“At a conference it is OK … Or you
could just enter your conference ID.”
Another suggested, “Oh, simply make
it turn-off-able, when you don’t want
to be localized.”
Other Use Cases
Users commonly agreed on alternative usage scenarios: “Inside buildings,
malls, etc. There it would be useful.
Outdoors you have GPS, which is already there, and people are used to it.
The key thing would be inside.”
Technical problems
Most technical problems were related
to erroneous camera drivers, which
unfortunately are common on Windows Mobile phones. Moreover, to
work on all Windows Mobile phones,
Signpost must support all various
screen resolutions, camera resolutions, and aspect ratios (see Figure 3).

www.computer.org/pervasive

For MEDC 2007, we tried to supply
configuration files for devices tested
in advance, which turned out to be insufficient, owing to brand and model
variety. For TechEd 2007, we implemented an automatic detection module for device capabilities, which improved the situation significantly. For
TechReady6 and TechReady7, we also
implemented a camera wizard that let
users work around the most common
driver bugs.
As we solved the most disruptive
problems, new issues emerged. For
example, power consumption due to
camera usage initially didn’t appear
to be a problem. However, running
Signpost with an active camera continuously in the background when the
phone wasn’t in use quickly drained
the battery.

T

he combination of quantitative and multiple qualitative studies shows that
marker-based indoor navigation provides advantages over simple,
manually operated digital maps. These
results also illustrate our approach’s
practicality in real-life use cases. To
our knowledge, Signpost is the first indoor navigation system successfully deployed at several large-scale venues that
runs on users’ own mobile phones. We
received encouraging feedback from
our test audience, despite the reported
technical difficulties.
Backed up by this positive feedback,
Signpost is now a commercial product.
It is adaptable to new events, thanks
to authoring tools that make it easy
to import existing floorplans. Tracking based on computer vision is costefficient, as it only requires placing a
few posters with markers at the site
rather than deploying an active beacon
infrastructure. The use of commercial
off-the-shelf camera phones lets users
experience the application on their own
devices, weaving navigation more intimately into everyday life.
In the future, we plan to compare our

April–june 2009

the Authors
Alessandro Mulloni is a PhD student at the Graz University of Technology.
His research interests include 3D real-time graphics on handheld devices and
human–computer interaction, especially user-centric design of interaction and
visualization methods for handheld augmented reality. Mulloni has an MSc in
computer science from the University of Udine. He is a student member of the
IEEE. Contact him at mulloni@icg.tugraz.at.

Daniel Wagner is a postdoctoral researcher at the Graz University of Technology. His research interests include mobile augmented-reality technology, and
real-time graphics and computer vision for mobile phones. Wagner has a PhD
in computer science from the Graz University of Technology. He is a member of
the IEEE. Contact him at wagner@icg.tugraz.at.

Istvan Barakonyi is a software developer at Imagination Computer Services
GesmbH. His research interests include stationary and mobile augmentedreality applications, virtual reality, and embodied autonomous agents. He has
a PhD in computer science from the Vienna University of Technology. Contact
him at istvan.barakonyi@imagination.at.

Dieter Schmalstieg is full professor of virtual reality and computer graphics at
the Graz University of Technology. He’s also an advisor for the K-Plus Competence Center for Virtual Reality and Visualization in Vienna, deputy director of
the doctoral college for confluence of graphics and vision, and director of the
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Handheld Augmented Reality. His research interests include augmented reality, virtual reality, distributed graphics, 3D user
interfaces, and ubiquitous computing. Schmalstieg has a PhD in computer science from the Vienna University of Technology. He is a member of the IEEE and
the Austrian Academy of Science. Contact him at schmalstieg@icg.tugraz.at.

guidance system with paper maps. We
see paper maps as a separate condition
from the space (digital maps) we’ve thus
far examined. Introducing another independent variable (paper vs. digital)
will require a separate user study and
far more test subjects. Further ongoing work includes integrating online
marketing campaign material by using
DataMatrix 2D barcodes as placeholders for Web links, and extending platform coverage. Our ultimate goal is for
Signpost to evolve from a conference
guide to a generic system for indoor
navigation. The application we envision
will support a broader range of venues
and tasks, and will have an embedded
scripting language to support direct
downloads of new functions and scenarios to the system.

Acknowledgments
This project was partially funded by the Austrian
Science Fund (FWF) under contract no. Y193 and
by the Christian Doppler Research Association
(CDG).

Reference
1. D. Schmalstieg and D. Wagner, “Experiences with Handheld Augmented Reality,” Proc. 6th IEEE/ACM Int’l Symp.
Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR
07), IEEE Press, 2007, pp. 3–18.

For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our Digital Library at
www.computer.org/csdl.

PER VA SI V E computing 31

