2005 International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing

Performance Comparison of Indoor Positioning Techniques
based on Location Fingerprinting in Wireless Networks
Tsung-Nan Lin, Po-Chiang Lin
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Email: {tsungnan, r92942075} @ ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Appropriate and correct indoor positioning in wireless
networks could provide interesting services and applications
in many domains. There are Time of Arrival (TOA), Time
Difference of Arrival (TDOA), Angle of Arrival (AOA), and
location fingerprinting schemes that can be used for
positioning. We locus on location fingerprinting in this
paper since it is more applicable to complex indoor
environments than other schemes. Location fingerprinting
uises received signal strength to estimate locations of mobile
nodes or uisers. Probabilistic method, k-nearest-neighbor,
and neural networks are pi-eviously proposed positioning
techniques based on location fingerprintitng. However, most
of these previouis works only concentrate on accuracy, which
means the average distance error. Actlually, it is not enough
to measure the performance of a positioning techniquie by the
accutracy only. A comprehensive performance comparison is
also critical and helpfidl in order to choose the most fitting
algorithm in real environments. In this paper, we compare
comprehensively various performance metrics including
accuracy, precision, complexitv, robuistness, and scalability.
Through our analysis and experiment results, k-nearestneighbor reports the best overall performance for the indoor
positioning purpose.

1. Introduction

The popularity of wireless access infrastructure and
mobile devices fulfils people's desire to access the
Meanwhile,
multimedia services ubiquitously.
providing additional context-aware services based on
the existing wireless access infrastructure gets more
and more interest. Indoor positioning is one of the
important techniques to make context-aware services
feasible. Many domains get benefits from indoor
location information of mobile units to provide useful
applications and services, such as museum tour-guide
and location-based handoff [1] [2].
Many positioning techniques have been proposed, as
introduced in [12-14], and they could be classified into
This work was supported in part by YULON NISSAN Motor Co
under grant 94-S-C04-H and by Taiwan National Science
Council under grant 93-221 3-E-002-057.

0-7803-9305-8/051$20.00 ©2005 IEEE

the following categories, including Time of Arrival
(TOA) [23], Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) [3]
[4], Angle of Arrival (AOA) [5], and location
However, not all
fingerprinting [6] [20-22].
techniques are suitable for indoor positioning because
of the complexity in the indoor environments. TOA,
TDOA, and AOA all estimate the location based on the
triangulation technique which requires the line-of-sight
(LOS) between the transmitter and the receiver [24].
For normal indoor environments, it is difficult to find a
LOS between the transmitter and the receiver.
Therefore, the time and angle of arrival signal would
be affected by the multipath effect, thus the positioning
Moreover, the
accuracy would be reduced.
measurement of time and angle of arrival signal
requires special hardware, so the cost for the
positioning task would be high. The last category,
location fingerprinting, which could overcome the
drawbacks mentioned above, use the received signal
strength (RSS) at the sampling locations to build a
";radio map" for the target environment. Location
fingerprinting performs well for non-line-of-sight
(NLOS) circumstances and LOS environments are not
required. Thus it is suitable for indoor positioning.
There are two stages for location fingerprinting: offline stage and on-line stage. During off-line stage, site
survey is performed in the target environment to
collect the RSS from nearby base stations at sampling
locations. Some preprocessing may be needed in this
stage. In the on-line stage, the positioning techniques
measure the RSS in real-time and calculate the
estimated location coordinates based on the knowledge
built during the off-line stage.
Probabilistic method, k-nearest-neighbor, and
neuiral networks are three popular machine techniques
which can be used in location fingerprinting. Youssef
et. al. proposed a joint clustering technique for indoor
positioning, which is based on probabilistic method [7].
Bahl et. al. proposed an in-building user location and
tracking system - RADAR [8], which adopts knearest-neighbor to compare multiple data sets and

1 569

pick the one that best matches the observed signal
strength. Neural networks have been shown to be
capable of approximating any nonlinear function to
certain degree of accuracy [10]. Therefore, Battiti et.
al. use neural networks to model the nonlinear
mapping between the location information and the RSS
[15].
However, there is no comprehensive
performance comparison about them so far, so it is
hard to say which one is better. Most of the previous
works only concentrate on the accuracy, which means
the average distance error, but it is not enough. In this
paper, we perform comprehensive performance
comparison based on five important criteria, including
accuracy, precision, complexitv, robustness, and
scalabilitv. In addition to the accuracy, we analyze the
distribution of distance errors, which is called
precision. The positioning technique with precision
concentrated on small values of distance errors would
be preferred, since it is more likely to get small
distance error. Complexity considers the computing
time and consumed power in the on-line stage, which
is critical when we implement positioning techniques
in mobile devices that have limited CPU power and
battery life. Furthermore, a positioning technique with
high robustness could function normally even when
some of the observed signal strength is never seen
before, or when some base stations are unavailable.
Scalability ensures the regular positioning algorithm is
still functional when the scope of the environment gets
large.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
discusses the three indoor positioning techniques based
on location fingerprinting. In section 3, we explain the
experiment environment and tools using for this paper.
Section 4 presents the five important performance
criteria and comparison results. Finally, section 5
concludes the paper.

locations.

Suppose vector S is the observed RSS

during on-line stage, and then the location candidate
&, is chosen if its posteriori probability is the highest.
The decision rule is:
Decide oi if P(&il S ) > P(O1j S ),
for i,j= 1, 2, 3, ..., n,ji

From Bayes' theorem:

5(o ) -P(SKIO1i) P((1)

p(S)

posteriori probability P( ,l S ) is the combination of
likelihood P( S &i), prior probability P(o), and
observed evidence P( S ). Since P( S ) keeps the same
for one positioning process, and the prior probability
P( o,) that a mobile node locates at a specific location
is assumed to be the same for all over the target
environment, the comparison of the posteriori
probability could be considered as the comparison of
likelihood:
Decide &.i if P( S I ) > P( S Io1),
for i,j=1,2,3,..., n,j.i
The likelihood of each location candidate is
assumed to be the Gaussian distribution. Therefore, by
parametric learning, the means and standard deviations
of each location candidate could be calculated from the
sample data. The base stations in the environment are
assumed to be independent, so the overall likelihood of
one location candidate can be calculated by directly
multiplying the likelihoods of all base stations:

P(9 I oij )= P(Sl I Oji)x P(S,? I oij )x x P(Sm

oi) (2)
where m is the number of base stations and Sj means
the RSS from thej-th base station.
In order to interpolate the position coordinates to
give more accurate results, we calculate the estimated
location (x, y) as the average of the coordinates of all
location candidates by adopting their posteriori
probabilities as weights.
...

2. Indoor Positioning Techniques based on
Location Fingerprinting

(x, y)=ZE(P(wi S (XZ ,

Location fingerprinting regards the positioning
problem as a pattern classification problem [9]. The
estimated location coordinate is calculated based on
the radio map built in the off-line stage and the
different supervised learning methods mentioned in the
following subsections.

i=l

(3)

2.2 K-Nearest-Neighbor
K-nearest-neighbor [9] calculates the distances
between the observed signal strength and all the
sample data sets in the previously-installed database.
Assume s, is the j-th sampling data from the i-th base
station, and Si is the observed signal strength from the
i-th base station in the on-line stage, where i = 1, 2, ....
m, j = 1, 2, ..., n, m is the number of base stations in the
environment, and n is the number of sample data sets.
The distance between Si and the s,j data set for all base
stations is:

2.1 Probabilistic Method
Suppose that there are n location candidates b, 02,
(3, ..., w, This means there are n classes, and the
most appropriate one is chosen based on the posteriori
probability. During the off-line stage, the RSS from
nearby base stations is measured in these n sampling

1570

Output
layer

Oi(3)

Wip(3)
Second
hidden
layer

0,i2)

Wij(2)
First
hidden
layer

001)
Wi,,1)

Input
layer

Figure 1. A multilayer perceptron.

di

Inm

(Si -s 4)2 ,j=l,2,...,n

(4)

After calculated the distance with respect to the
whole sample set, a set of k data samples from the
database is chosen according the smallest distaince.
Then, by averaging these k location coordinates, the
location (x,y) of the on-line collected signal car'ibe
estimated.
k

(x,y)= k(Xi, Yi

where (xi, Yi) is the location coordinates of the i-th
candidate.

2.3 Neural Networks

Neural networks are proved to be effectil aeld
constructing the non-linear input-output mapping
have been used in several applications such asn
classification, approximation, and regularization [
The multilayer perceptron (MLP) is one of the nmost
common neural networks that adopt the supervised
leaming algorithms. MLP consists of a set of sen,sory
units that constitutes the input layer, one or n
hidden layers of computational neurons, and an oultpUt
layer. The input signal propagates through the netutork
in a forward direction, on a layer-by-layer basis. Fi
1 displays a MLP with two hidden layers. The oultput
of the ith neuron at the Ith layer can be described asstput

10].

isory

guork

ai (I)= S)j4 () oi (I - I) + oi (I)
j=1
°i (I)= f(a

f(x)= l+e-x

(8)

or the hyperbolic tangent function:
f (-e
x

f(x) = t~anhf y2 =e
1 +e-x

(9)

The MLP can be viewed as a nonlinear input-output
mapping from an n-dimensional Euclidean input space
to an m-dimensional Euclidean output space. The
universal approximation theorem provides the
mathematical justification for the approximation of an
arbitrary continuous function [16-19].

(5)

i=1

N,,

Figure 2. Part of the fifth floor plane of NTU EE, where we
performn the experiment. The black dots show the locations
of the access points.
The function f is a smooth nonlinear function (i.e.,
differentiable everywhere). Usually it is a sigmoid
function:

*:

3. Experiment Environments and Tools
In order to

the performance of the

three
techniques mentioned above, we collect signal strength
compare

in a real environment. Figure 2 shows the environment
where we perform the experiment. The dimension of
the corridor is

24.6

x

17.6

meters.

Every place

in

this

environment is covered by at least five IEEE 802.1 lb

APs. We adopt an IBM ThinkPad T40 laptop as the
mobile node, with RedHat 7.1 Linux operating system.
A

Lucent

WaveLan/IEEE

Wireless

Card

with

Youssef's driver [ 11] is installed to gather signal

strength from nearby APs.

We collect two groups of signal strength for off-line
and on-line testing purpose. First we
measure signal strength at 42 sampling locations on the
corridor for the first group. These sampling locations
are separated by 2 meters. At each location we collect

measuring

(6)

(I))

where ai(l) and oi(l) are the activation and ouitput
value of the neuron i in the Ith hidden layer. The
activation is the weighted sum of output from neurrons
at (1- 1)th layer plus the bias term. oj(l) refers to the
weight connecting the output from thejth neuron atit 1 layer to the input of the ith neuron at the Ith la

100 samples of the signal strength. Then we collect
set of signal strength in 84 positions at
different time for the second group. These locations
are separated by 1 meter.
At each location we collect

another

100 samples of the signal strength.

1571

790.(0%

2

0.00%

tI10 .5

-_-W Pn6bilisgiw Method_

C 70.00%
,

I

_

es

20.00%

_

10.00%
1(

20

30

40

50

60

70

4(2

80

0.00%

100

0

Number of Smiples

1

2

3

4

5
Disamce E-r

6

A K-Neaeo-Neighbr (0I
-K-Nearer-Neioh00r (2)_

-X- K-

t-Neighbor (4)

-- Neusa Netork (4)
-- N-] Neo-k (8)
-+
-_ - Neurad Network (16)

7

8

9

_

10

Figure 3. Accuracy of the three positioning techniques

Figure 4. Precision of the three positioning techniques.

By parametric learning from the sample data, we get
the estimate of the means and standard deviations of
the likelihoods used in the probabilistic method. In knearest-neighbor, there are no preprocessing
requirements. We change the number of the nearest
neighbors, k, from I to 2 and 4 to see the effects. In
neural networks, we adopt three-layer MLP topology.
Neural Network Toolbox in Matlab is used for
designing, training and testing. We adopt sigmoid
function as the transfer function of neurons, and set the
number of iterations as 1000. We also change the
number of hidden layer neurons from 4 to 8 and 16 to
see its effects.

meter. Changing the number of nearest neighbor, k,
from 1 to 2 and 4, also has no obvious effect on
accuracy.
Neural network gets the worst accuracy among the
three. However, most of the results show 1.3 to 2.8
meters of distance error, which might be still
acceptable in normal indoor environments for most
applications. Increasing the number of samples from
10 to 40 would significantly improve the accuracy,
while increasing it from 40 to 100 would not.
Therefore, 40 could be a sufficient number of training
samples for neural networks to efficiently
approximately the nonlinear mapping function.
Increasing the number of hidden layer neurons would
improve the accuracy, but the improvement is not

4. Performance Criteria and Comparison
Results

significant.
Probabilistic method gets a middle distance error,
about 1.1 to 1.6 meters. Increasing the number of
samples at each sampling location would improve its
accuracy. This is intuitive because increasing the
number of samples would improve the estimation for
means and standard deviations of Gaussian distribution.

The following describes the five performance
criteria and our experiment results based on the sample
data and preprocessing results got in Section 3.

4.1 Accuracy

Accuracy shows how accurate the positioning
techniques could achieve. We adopt mean distance
error as the performance metric, which is the average
Euclidean distance between the estimated location
(x, y) and the true location (x, y):

E(distance error)

=

E(

(x - x)2+ (y

-

4.2 Precision

Precision considers the distribution of distance
errors, while accuracy only considers the value of
mean distance errors.
When two positioning
techniques are compared, the one with distribution of
distance errors concentrated on smaller values would
be preferred, since it is more likely that we could get
smaller distance error by this positioning technique.
We analyze the cumulative probability function (CDF)
of distance errors of different positioning techniques,
as shown in Figure 4.

y)2

(10)
Figure 3 shows the average distance errors of the three
techniques. In our experiment, the number of samples
at each sampling location varies from 10, 20, to 100
with increment of 10.
From the result shown in Figure2, k-nearestneighbor shows the best accuracy, around I meter,
among the three techniques. Decreasing the number of
samples at each sampling location gets only the minor
impact on accuracy. It still gets the accuracy around 1

From the "precision" point of view, Knearest-neighbor still shows the best
In k-nearest-neighbor, 80
performance.
percent of distance errors are within 1 meter.
Probabilistic method reports a value of 2

1572

meters to reach the same cumulative
probability. In the neural networks, 80
percent of distance errors are within 2 to 2.5
meters, which is dependent on the number of
hidden layer neurons. This analysis shows
consistent result with the accuracy
companson.
Pcationtne Tehuiqws

Conputin- Time

Prcbabilitc Miethod

2 seconds
K-Neare-Neigh-bor.e
. lo ci10econd
100 rnip1es at each iamhng lcaticn)
K-N-earet-Neihbor.
(10 sample-s at each samphns tocation)
Neural Netwoiksm0:s
-25 seconds

Tabble 1. Comput'ig time of the three pounomng :ecd=ques

4.3 Complexity
Complexity considers the computing time required

for the on-line stage. When the computation is
performed on the mobile node, the impact of
complexity would be obvious. Because of the shortage
of CPU processing power and battery life in a mobile
device, the positioning technique with smaller
complexity would be preferred. In the experiments,
we repeat each positioning programs for 2500 times on
an IBM ThinkPad T40 laptop with Intel 1600 MHz
CPU. Table 1 shows the respective computing time.
When applying 100 samples at each sampling
location, k-nearest-neighbor requires the most
computing time comparing to the other two techniques.
Neural network needs the least computing time, but its
accuracy is the poorest of the three. There is a tradeoff
between complexity and accuracy / precision. It is
noted that the complexity of k-nearest-neighbor is
strongly dependent on the number of samples at each
sampling location, while the other two are not.
Decrease the number of samples at each sampling
location to 10 would improve the computing time of knearest-neighbor to competitive 1 second, while still
keeps considerably accurate.

4.4 Robustness
A positioning technique with high robustness could

function normally for the following two cases.
Case 1. when some of the observed signal strength is
never seen before:
For probabilistic method, since Gaussian
distribution is continuous, even the never-seen signal
strength would get respective likelihood value.

1573

Therefore, probabilistic method is able to function
normally.
For k-nearest-neighbor, the arbitrary value of the
signal strength could be used to calculate the distance
in the signal space. Therefore, the never-seen signal
strength would not be a problem.
Since neural networks have the generalization
capability, the never-seen signal strength would not be
a problem, either.

Case 2. when some base stations become unavailable:
Assume that the u-th base station is unavailable. Its
signal strength is Su . The number of available base
stations changes from m to (m - 1).
For probabilistic method, we simply set the
likelihood P(Su wi)= 1 for all location candidates,
and then formula (2) could function as usual.
For k-nearest-neighbor, we change from mdimensional to (m - 1)-dimensional signal space, and
then k-nearest-neighbor functions normally.
For neural networks, we could assign a value
smaller than all values we seen before (-100 dBm, for
example) to SU, so the positioning could still function.
However, choosing a representative value requires a
careful consideration.
4.5 Scalability
Scalability ensures an algorithm can reuse its
knowledge (parameters constructed previously) when
the scope of the environment gets large. Usually the
radio cover range of a base station has some limit. A
large area might not be covered by the same set of base
stations. Some positioning techniques may require
extra preprocessing to handle this problem.
Assuming there are totally M base stations in the
whole environment, and we collect data from m base
stations during the on-line stage.
For probabilistic method, we first check the database.
If the location candidate t); is not covered by these m
base stations, we set its posteriori probability P(wjIS)
to be 0, which means that the mobile node is probably
not at this location candidate
For k-nearest-neighbor, only the subsets of sample
data that contain these m base stations are chosen.
Then we perform calculation as subsection 2.2
describes according to these subsets of sample data.
Neural networks require the input base stations to be
fixed, in order to be trained and tested. We have to
divide the whole area into several smaller sub-areas.
Each sub-area is covered by a set of base stations. We
design and train a neural network for each sub-area.
While performing positioning, first of all, we have to
decide which sub-area the mobile node may belong to
by checking the sensed base stations, and then we can

perform positioning by means of the specified neural
network using in that sub-area.

[101 S. Haykin, "Neural Networks - A Comprehensive
Foundation," Second Edition, Prentice-Hall, 1999.
[I1] M. A. Youssef s Web Page,

5. Conclusion

http://www.cs.umd.edu/users/moustafa/
[12] J. Hightower, G. Borriello, "Location systems for
ubiquitous computing," IEEE Computer Magazine,
volume 34, issue 8, Aug. 2001, pp. 57-66.
[13] K. Pahlavan, X. Li, J. Makela, "Indoor geolocation
science and technology," IEEE Communications
Magazine, February 2002.
[14] Y. Zhao, "Mobile phone location determination and its
impact on intelligent transportation systems," IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol.
1, No. 1, March 2000.
[15] R. Battiti, T. L. Nhat, A. Villani, "Location-aware
computing: a neural network model for determining
location in wireless LANs," Technical Report DIT-020083, Department of Information and Communication
Technology, University of Trento, Feb. 2002.
[16] G. Cybenko, "Approximation by superpositions of a
sigmoidal function," Mathematics of Control, Signals,
and Systems, 2(4):303-314, 1989.
[17] K. Funahashi, "On the approximate realization of
continuous mappings by neural networks," Neural
Networks, 2(3):183-192, 1989.
[18] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, "Multilayer
feedforward networks are universal approximators,"
Neural Networks, 2(5):359-336, 1989.
[19] B. Irie and S. Miyake, "Capabilities of three-layered
perceptrons," in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Neural Networks, volume 1, pages 641648, San Diego, CA, 1988. IEEE.
[20] K. Kaemarungsi, P. Krishnamurthy, "Properties of
indoor received signal strength for WLAN location
fingerprinting," in Proceedings of the First Annual
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Systems: Networking and Service, 2004.

For many location-based services and applications,
it is crucial to find out an appropriate and correct
positioning technique. The probabilistic method, knearest-neighbor, and neural networks are techniques
of estimating the location based on information of
received signal strength. In this paper, we achieve
comprehensive comparison of three indoor positioning
techniques based on location fingerprinting. We
compare performance of five performance criteria,
including accuracy, precision, complexity, robustness,
and scalability. Additionally, we find out that knearest-neighbor gets the best performance with high
accuracy and precision, and its complexity could be
reduced to a competitive level, while still keep good
accuracy.
Furthermore, k-nearest-neighbor could
handle the robustness and scalability issues by little or
no extra efforts.

6. References

[1] S. Thrun, "Probabilistic algorithms in robotics," Al
Magazine, 21(4):93-109, 2000.
[2] M. H. Jin, H. K. Wu, and J. T. Hormg, "An Intelligent
Handoff Scheme Based On Location Prediction
Technologies", IEEE European Wireless 2002. pp. 551 557, Feb. 2002
[3] M. A. Spirito, "On the Accuracy of Cellular Mobile
Station Location Estimation", IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 50, No. 3, May 2001.
[4] T. S. Rappaport, J. H. Reed, and D. Woerner, "Position
location using wireless communications on highways of
the future", IEEE Comm. Magazine, Vol. 34, pp. 33-41,
Oct. 1996.
[5] S. Tekinay, "Wireless Geolocation Systems and
Services," Special Issue of the IEEE Comm. Magazine,
April 1998
[6] M. Brunato and C. K. Kall6, "Transparent Location
Fingerprinting for Wireless Services," technical report
DIT-02-07 1,
Informatica e Telecomunicazioni,
University of Trento, 2002
[7] M. A. Youssef, A. Agrawala, A. U. Shankar, "WLAN
Location Determination via Clustering and Probability
Distributions," IEEE International Conference on
Pervasive Computing and Communications, 2003.
[8] P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan. RADAR: An InBuilding RF-based User Location and Tracking System.
In IEEE Infocom 2000, volume 2, pages 775-784, March
2000.
[9] R. 0. Duda, P. E. Hart, D. G., "Pattern Classification,"
Second Edition, John Wiley, 2000

[21] A. Taheri, A. Singh, E. Agu, "Location fingerprinting on
infrastructure 802.11 wireless local area networks (WLANs)
using Locus," in Proceedings of the 29th Annual IEEE
Intemational Conference on Local Computer Networks, 2004.
[22] K. Kaemarungsi, P. Krishnamurthy, "Modeling of indoor
positioning systems based on location fingerprinting," IEEE
fNFOCOM 2004.
[23] P. H. Dana, "Global positioning system overview,"

http://www.colorado.edu/geography/gcraft/notes/gps/gps.html
[24] J. Hightower, G. Borriello, "Location sensing techniques,"
technical report UW-CSE-01-07-01, Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Washington, August 8, 200 1.

1574

