See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/229039254

The accuracy of algorithms for WLAN indoor positioning and the
standardization of signal reception for different mobile devices
Article · January 2007
CITATIONS

READS

18

225

3 authors, including:
Uwe Grossmann
University of Applied Science and Arts Dortmund
50 PUBLICATIONS 366 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Indoor Positioning View project

Smart Service Power View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Uwe Grossmann on 29 January 2014.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

The accuracy of algorithms for WLAN indoor positioning and the
standardization of signal reception for different mobile devices
Grossmann, U.; Schauch, M.; Hakobyan, S.
Business Department, Dortmund University of Applied Sciences, Emil-Figge-Strasse 44, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
uwe.grossmann@fh-dortmund.de, markus.schauch@fh-dortmund.de, syuzanna.hakobyan@fh-dortmund.de
www.ikaros-projekt.de
Abstract: Often mobile devices like mobile phones or personal digital assistants (PDA) are equipped with IEEE 802.11
WLAN adapters. Furthermore, within many buildings a WLAN infrastructure is available. The aim of this work is to
investigate the quality of different indoor positioning methods based on values of WLAN received signal strength index
(RSSI) using commercially available devices (mobile phones, PDA). Three positioning algorithms were considered:
minimal Euclidian distance, intersections of RSSI-Isolines and a stochastic model based on Bayes' theorem. Two
measuring testbeds, a museum's exhibition room and an empty seminar room, four different types of PDA (Dell, Fujitsu,
HP, T-Mobile) and two types of access points (Netgear, Lancom) were used.
Results show that positioning can be achieved with an average accuracy of approx. 2-3 metres. WLAN capable mobile
devices behave differently in receiving RSSI values of a base station. For reasons of standardization a linear
correlation between different receiving levels of PDA was investigated.
Keywords: WLAN, RSSI, Positioning, Bayes, Euclidian distance, Triangulation, Isoline

1. Introduction
Location based services (LBS) will be one of the
most exiting features of the next generation wireless
systems. Location based services are already
established in the area of mobile phone networks
using the global positioning system (GPS) as
outdoor positioning component. Since GPS is not
working indoors, establishing LBS within buildings
needs an indoor wireless network, for instance
WLAN, together with an positioning system [1].
The aim of the activities presented in this paper
was the investigation of different WLAN positioning
algorithms for indoor position based applications.
The increase of existing WLAN infrastructures
inside of buildings and the commercial availability
of WLAN capable mobile devices leads to the
question, whether an indoor positioning using such
infrastructures and devices would be accurate
enough for mobile indoor applications.
Beside other methods some are based on values
of received signal strength index (RSSI) of several
access points. Several mathematical methods exist
for calculating the current position. We investigated
the accuracy of determining the current position
using three different algorithms.
Commercially available mobile devices like
personal digital assistants (PDA) with WLAN
capability show different reception quality of RSSIvalues. We investigated the correlation between
recorded RSSI-values of different PDA.
Several measurements were carried out in two
testbeds over the period of a year's time. Methods,

testbeds, measurements and results are presented
below.

2. Related Work
Several groups are working on WLAN-RSSI
based indoor positioning methods using different
algorithms and different mobile devices.
Ladd et al. [2] used a Bayesian inference
algorithm for comparing histograms of calibration
and positioning phase. Experiments were conducted
by a human operator carrying a Hewlett Packard
OmniBook 6000 laptop with a PCMCIA LinkSys
wireless Ethernet card. They modified the standard
Linux kernel driver to support new functionalities,
including the scanning and recording of hardware
MAC addresses and signal strengths of packets and
the automatic scanning of base stations. Sampling
times ranged from ten seconds to about a minute. A
total of 1307 packets on 11 different positions were
measured. Neighbouring positions are located in 3
meters distance from each other. The algorithm
reported calculated positions with a deviation of up
to 1.5 meters from the measuring position.
Retscher et al. [3] developed the IPOS system
using RSSI-fingerprints as well. Their testbed was
an office building and a tablet-pc was moved from
each position to the next either in stop-and-go or
kinematic mode. They focussed on determining
wether a user is located inside a room or not and
wether one or two calibration points within one
room are sufficient.

Teuber et al. [4] used a method of minimal
Euclidian distance together with Fuzzy logic
postprocessing. Their testbed was an empty airport
hangar. Accuracy of positioning was 4.47 m using
Euclidian distance alone. With Fuzzy logic
postprocessing the accuracy decreased to 3 m.

The authors developed a method identifying
intersections of lines of constant RSSI-values
(isolines) of several base stations within interpolated
radio maps based on a Delaunay triangulation [6]. A
slightly modified method was used by Röhrig et al.
[7] focussing on a triangulation with larger mesh
widths.

3. Lines of constant received signal
strength index (RSSI-Isolines)
The Isoline method proposed here belongs to the
group of fingerprint methods, i.e. measured RSSI
values of several base stations (access points) are
compared with RSSI values previously recorded
during a calibration phase.
A network of triangles not overlapping each other
with grid nodes representing the triangle nodes is
developed using Delaunay triangulation [8]. The
triangle nodes are represented by the calibration
points. Fig. 1 shows the triangulation of one of our
testbeds, an empty seminar room of size 15m x 7m.

(

)

6

5

4

-70
-65
-60

3

-55
-50
-45

Y

The Ekahau Positioning Engine (EPE) [5] is a
commercially available Software for RSSI-WLAN
indoor positioning. The engine combines according
to the manufacturer's instructions signal strength
pattern recognition together with an attempt to
include the user’s history (boundary conditions like
allowed paths and speed). Determination of the
current position is possible depending on the
environment with an accuracy of 1-5 m.

map consisting of a surface of interpolated RSSI
values over the entire area of triangulation. (Fig. 2).

-40

2

1
2,3

3,3

4,3

5,3

6,3

7,3

8,3

9,3

10,3

11,3

12,3

X

Fig. 2 - Interpolated radio map of one access point
(right upper corner)

Given a RSSI-value of one access point recorded
during positioning phase we can select triangles
whose nodes have RSSI-values recorded during
calibration phase, which are higher and lower than
the RSSI-value recorded during positioning phase.
Within such a triangle it is possible to calculate an
interpolated line of constant RSSI-value (isoline).
These isolines build continous trajectories through
the whole area of triangulation.
Given two RSSI-values of different access points
measured simultaneously at the same location we are
now able to select triangles whose interpolated radio
maps include the according isolines. Fig. 3 shows a
triangulation with triangles including one or two
isolines of different access points. If there is an
intersection of the two isolines, we can calculate the
intersection point within the triangle. A first idea
takes the intersection point as estimated position.

Fig. 1 - Triangulation of testbed 1 ('seminar')

Fig. 3 - Triangles with isolines of two access points

Every node of the triangulation in Fig. 1
represents a calibration point, i.e. RSSI-values are
recorded at every point from four access points
located at the four corners of the room. Having
recorded RSSI-values of an access point at every
calibration point linear interpolation between node
values within one triangle delivers a detailed radio

Using small sized triangles with mesh width up
to 1m the balance point of the triangle itself can be
used as the estimated position.
Usually we will select several triangles including
isolines of several base stations. We rank all
triangles of the entire triangulation according to the
number of isolines they include. The secondary

ranking parameter is the number of intersections
within one triangle.
The "best" triangle is assumed to be the triangle
with the largest number of isolines and the largest
number of intersections. The estimated position is
assumed to be the balance point of the "best"
triangle or the average of all intersection points
within this triangle. For our evaluation we used the
average of the balance points of the five "best"
triangles.
As an example Fig. 4 shows the result of the
ranking process. Isolines of RSSI-values recorded
from all four base stations are drawn and marked by
different grey scale values. The shaded areas show
five triangles selected as "best" triangles. They
contain at least three different isolines and one
intersection. The original measuring position is
marked by the black square.

11m) was used. Both locations had been equipped
with four access points at the outer corners below
the room's ceilings. In two series of measurements
Netgear and Lancom access points were used as
base stations.
Fig. 5 shows the triangulation of testbed 2
('museum'). Some triangles of the original
triangulation had to be eliminated, because they
cover areas with large exhibits or areas people are
not able to enter. Such triangles contribute
misleading data, so they had to be removed from the
triangulation

Fig. 5 - Triangulation of testbed 'museum'

For measuring WLAN RSSI-values personal
digital assistants (PDA) with Windows Mobile OS
and with inbuilt WLAN adapter were used.
Recordings were carried out using devices of the
manufacturers Fujitsu-Siemens (Pocket Loox 720),
Hewlett Packard (hx4700), T-Mobile (MDA III) and
Dell (Axim X50v).
Fig. 4 - Radio map including isolines of 4 access points

4. Accuracy and comparison of three
positioning algorithms
One aim of our measurements was to investigate
and compare the accuracy of three algorithms used
for WLAN-RSSI indoor positioning: the Bayes
inference algorithm (Bayes) [2], the algorithm of
minimal Euclidian distance (Euclid) [4] and the
algorithm using Isolines within a triangulation
(Isolines). All three algorithms were implemented in
C# resulting in corresponding positioning programs,
which deliver a position within the area covered by
the triangulation resp. a grid of calibration nodes.
Knowing the original measuring position we are able
to calculate the deviation between the original and
the estimated position.

For simultaneous recording of WLAN RSSIvalues of four access points with a PDA a software
tool was developed. The tool was implemented in
C# using the OpenNetCF framework. The
framework offers methods for recording data like
SSID, Mac address and RSSI values of neighbouring
WLAN access points.
Both testbeds were provided with a 1 metre
rectangular grid covering the ground floor.
Measurements were carried out during calibration
phase at each of these points in four directions (0, 90
180, 270 degree). RSSI-tuples of all 4 access points
had been recorded simultaneously over a period of
50 seconds (one recording per second).
Fig. 6 shows a radio map of testbed 2 ('museum').
The access point is positioned in the left lower
corner below the room's ceiling.

5. Testbeds and measurements
Measurements were carried out within two
different testbeds: testbed 1 ('seminar') and testbed 2
('museum'). Testbed 1 represents an empty seminar
room (scale: approx. 15m x 7m) in a building of
Dortmund University of Applied Sciences. As
testbed 2 an exhibition room of the museum "Strom
und Leben" at Recklinghausen (scale: approx. 30m x

Fig. 6 - Radio map of testbed 'museum'
(access point at the left lower corner)

All recordings were carried out by a person
keeping the PDA horizontally in front of him in his
left hand. Recording was started by the person by
clicking on a button on the touch screen with his
right hand.

Between August 2005 and November 2006
several test series were carried out in both testbeds.
There was one series in testbed 2 ('museum'), a tour
through the exhibition room and three series of
measurements in testbed 1 ('seminar'). Within the
latter there was one series called 'exhibit', where the
measuring person stands close to the wall with
orientation to the wall like observing an exhibit at
the wall. Another series ('strolling') was a loop
through the room with orientation parallel to the
walls and the third series ('random') consists of
measurements at calibration points randomly
selected.

6. Standardization of reception quality of
different types of PDA
Another aim of our measurements was the
analysis of receiving quality of different types of
PDA. During our measurements we observed
significant differences of different PDA concerning
their WLAN reception quality. The following two
figures will illustrate this.
Fig. 7 shows a radio map based on RSSI-values
recorded from access point 1 (AP1) with a Dell PDA
within testbed 1 ('seminar'). The access point is
located at the upper right corner.
Dell Axim x50v
6

5
-70
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40

4

Y
3

2

1
2,3

3,3

4,3

5,3

6,3

7,3

8,3

9,3

10,3

11,3

12,3

X

Fig. 7: Radiomap recorded by a Dell PDA
(testbed 1, AP1, orientation 0 degree)

Fig. 8 shows a radio map based on RSSI-values
recorded from AP1 analogously with FujitsuSiemens PDA again within testbed 1 ('seminar').

5
-70
-65
-60
-55

4

Y

During positioning phase measurements were
carried out under the same conditions as in the
calibration phase at known grid points and with
known orientation. The recorded data had been
stored in a database.

Fujitsu Pocket Loox 720
6

3

-50
-45
-40

2

1
2,3

3,3

4,3

5,3

6,3

7,3

8,3

9,3

10,3

11,3

12,3

X

Fig. 8: Radiomap recorded by a Fujitsu PDA
(testbed 1, AP1, orientation 0 degree)

During both measurements the parameters of the
testbed, particularly the transmitting power of the
base station (AP1), were not changed. The
difference between the two radio maps is obvious.
Especially, when using fingerprint methods this
represents a major problem, because calibration has
to be repeated for every different type of PDA
resulting in a multiplication of workload.
One reason for the difference of radio maps could
be the influence of the measuring person, who did
not perform both measurements along the same
lines. To exclude this we tried to make sure, that the
measuring process was always carried out along the
same strict specifications. There were guidelines for
keeping and positioning the PDA. Moreover, the
measurements were carried out by the same person.
Another reason for this phenomenon may be due
to different receiving capabilities of the mobile
devices' inbuilt WLAN adapters and their antenna
layouts. One possibility to overcome this problem
and to reduce calibration amount is to find a
function, which correlates the RSSI-values of two
different types of PDA. If there are such functions,
calibration can be carried out by one PDA, and
during positioning phase 'correlated' PDA may be
used.
Table 1: RSSI-values recorded by four PDA under
identical conditions
BS
AP1
AP1
…
AP2
AP2
…
AP3
AP3
…
AP4
AP4
…

MP
MP 001
MP 002

Dell
-46,23
-43,60

Fujitsu
-54,97
-49,38

HP
-44,95
-42,82

MDA
-49,70
-49,12

MP 001
MP 002

-49,95
-50,35

-52,60
-55,72

-45,75
-50,00

-52,05
-53,15

MP 001
MP 002

-58,35
-55,47

-61,78
-61,63

-56,53
-54,43

-61,68
-63,27

MP 001
MP 002

-57,87
-56,53

-63,42
-65,58

-59,63
-58,48

-63,90
-65,43

Within testbed 1 ('seminar') we recorded RSSIvalues from all base stations at all calibration points
with all available PDA along the same lines
(identical transmission power, orientation etc.).

and 'Isolines' arranged according to the different
series are shown in Fig. 10.

Table 1 shows recorded RSSI-values of four
PDA. The RSSI-values in one row correspond to the
same base station, the same calibration point, the
same transmission power and the same orientation.
The idea is to find out, wether RSSI-values
recorded under identical circumstances from one
base station by two PDA are linearly correlated.
Using regression analysis [9] parameters for a
linear correlation between the RSSI-values recorded
by the Dell-PDA and the three other PDA were
calculated with Microsoft EXCEL.

(1)

RSSIx means a RSSI-value recorded by one of the
other PDAs. Ax and Bx are the parameters calculated
by regression analysis for PDAx. RSSIx-values will
be transformed to RSSIDell-values and may than be
compared to RSSI-values recorded by the Dell-PDA
during calibration phase.

Table 2: Average difference between measuring and
estimated position
test series

ISOLINE

For visualization the values of HP, Fujitsu and TMobile were plotted on the x-coordinate (abscissa)
against the values of Dell on the y-coordinate
(ordinate). Fig. 9 shows the result.

Table 2 shows more precisely the average
distance between measuring position and estimated
position together with the corresponding standard
deviation of a test series rearranged according to the
different algorithms.

BAYES

RSSI Dell = Ax * RSSI x + Bx ;

Fig. 10 - Comparing the accuracies of three algorithms

EUCLID

The Dell PDA was selected as reference device,
since it has shown the most stable behaviour of all
used mobile devices during the measurements. For
every combination (Fujitsu-Dell, HP-Dell, TMobile-Dell) separate calculations were carried out.
The result of each calculation is a linear equation:

Museum
Seminar
Seminar
Seminar
Museum
Seminar
Seminar
Seminar
Museum
Seminar
Seminar
Seminar

tour
exhibit
strolling
random
tour
exhibit
strolling
random
tour
exhibit
strolling
random

mean
(m)
4,01
2,03
2,67
2,91
4,16
1,47
2,91
2,33
3,40
2,90
2,00
2,00

standard
deviation
(m)
2,27
2,34
1,40
1,56
2,51
1,27
1,15
1,51
1,71
0,48
0,58
1,04

Table 2 and Fig. 10 show ambiguous results.
There is no definite best algorithm. The isoline
method has an advantage, since regarding the mean
deviation it is three times on the first position, but
after all at least once on the last position. Standard
deviations seem to be significantly smaller for the
isoline method in comparison to those of the other
algorithms.
Fig. 9 - Scatter-plot of correlated RSSI-values

7. Results
The results of measurements concerning the
accuracies of the three algorithms 'Bayes', 'Euclid'

The measurements within testbed 2 ('museum')
result in larger average deviations than those in
testbed 2 ('seminar'). This may be due to the more
inhomogenous environment of testbed 2. Testbed 1
is an empty room, testbed 2 a room containing
several large exhibits.

In testbed 2 ('museum') we observe an average
deviation between 3,4m and 4,16m depending on the
selected algorithm, in testbed 1 an average deviation
between 1,47m and 2,91m again depending on the
algorithm.

used framework's methods are not mirroring
instantly (within a period of a second or less) RSSIvalue changes. The framework OpenNETCF has to
be reexamined.

The results of the regression analysis are
presented quantitatively in Table 3. As shown
qualitatively in Fig. 9 we can observe rather linear
correlations between the RSSI-values measured by
the Dell PDA and the other PDA.

9. Acknowledgement

Table 3: Regression analysis of RSSI-values
PDA
Fujitsu-Dell
HP-Dell
T-Mobile-Dell

Correlation
Coefficient
0,9036
0,8677
0,8252

Correlation
y = 0,834x - 4,164
y = 0,787x - 11,648
y = 0,774x - 7,612

A good positive linear correlation between the
signal level indices of the Fujitsu PDA and the Dell
PDA is found. The correlation coefficient was
calculated as 0,9036. The corresponding coefficients
of the correlations HP-Dell and T-Mobile-Dell are
calculated as 0,8677 and 0,8252.

8. Conclusion
The results of this paper show, that WLAN-RSSI
based positioning can be achieved with
commercially available Personal digital assistants
without modification of hardware and software.
For the time being WLAN-RSSI-based
fingerprint positioning technologies seem to be not
accurate enough for disposal in position based
indoor applications using personal digital assistants
in all environments. In small and medium sized
rooms the accuracy of positioning is not sufficient.
Moreover, obstacles preventing line of sight
transmission cause further detoriation of accuracy.
Within larger rooms and a required accuracy of not
less than 2-3 m WLAN-RSSI based indoor
positioning can be used.
The comparison of the different PDA and their
receiving capabilities shows a distinctive linear
correlation. Correlation coefficients values of 0.9
(Fujitsu), 0.86 (HP) and 0.82 (T-Mobile) suggest a
good positive linear correlation. This will lead to a
considerable decrease in calibration workload and
make fingerprint methods more applicable.
There are improvements possible by refining
measuring technology. By using the framework
OpenNETCF some series of measurements over
time showed an unusual behaviour. RSSI-values did
not change over a period of several seconds, whereas
a change within a range of 3-5 db every second was
observed usually. There is some evidence, that the

This work was funded by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF-Projekt
IKAROS).
The authors are grateful to Mr. Hanswalter
Dobbelmann, head of museum "Strom und Leben"
Recklinghausen, for his cooperation and support.

10. References
[1] Rerrer, U.; Kao, O.: Suitability of Positioning
Techniques for Location-based Services in
wireless LANs, Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop "On Positioning, Navigation And
Communication (WPNC05)", Hannover, 17
Mach 2005, pp. 51-56
[2] Ladd, A. M.; Bekris, K. E.; Rudys, A.; Kavraki,
L. E.; Wallach, D. S.: Robotics-based location
sensing using wireless Ethernet, Wireless
Networks, 11 (1-2) (2005), pp. 189 - 204
[3] Retscher, G.; Moser, E.; Vredeveld, D.;
Heberling, D.; Performance and Accuracy Test
of the WLAN Indoor Positioning System "ipos";
Proceedings of the 3nd Workshop "On
Positioning, Navigation And Communication
(WPNC06)", Hannover, 16 March 2006, pp. 715
[4] Teuber A.; Eisfeller B.; WLAN Indoor
Positioning Based on Euclidian Distances and
Fuzzy Logic; Proceedings of the 3nd Workshop
"On
Positioning,
Navigation
And
Communication (WPNC06)", Hannover, 16
March 2006, pp. 159-168
[5] Ekahau; Ekahau Positioning Engine 2.0; 802.11
based Wireless LAN positioning system; An
Ekahau Technology document, 2002
[6] Grossmann, U.; Röhrig, C.; Hakobyan, S.;
Domin, T.; Dalhaus, M.: WLAN indoor
positioning based on Euclidian distance and
interpolation (isobars), Wireless Technologies
(Hrsg. Wollert, Jörg), Fortschritt-Berichte VDI,
Reihe 10 Nr. 772, Dortmund, 27-28 September
2006, S.296-305
[7] Röhrig, C.; Künemund, F.: Mobile Robot
Localization using WLAN Signal Strengths;
Personal Communication, 2006

[8] Klein, R; Algorithmische Geometrie, AddisonWesley, Bonn, 1997.

[9] Chatterjee, Price; Praxis der Regressionsanalyse, Oldenbourg, 1995;

Prof. Dr. Uwe Grossmann
Studies of Mathematics and Information Technology at Bochum University, Germany
PhD in Mathematics (Bochum University)
Current Position: Professor of Mathematics and Business Information Technology at Dortmund University
of Applied Sciences; project manager of joint BMBF research project IKAROS; Speaker of research group
'Mobile Business - Mobile Systems' of Dortmund University of Applied Sciences
Focus of research: multimedia applications, mobile business/commerce, mobile systems

Dipl. Inf. Markus Schauch
Studies of Business information technology at Dortmund University of Applied Sciences
Former occupation: Consultant at Eutelis Consult, Ratingen, with focus on deregulation of German
telecommunication market.
Current position: Research associate at Business Department of Dortmund University of Applied Sciences;
coordinator of joint BMBF research project IKAROS
Focus of research: mobile business / mobile commerce

Syuzanna Hakobyan, MSc.
Studies of Information Technology and Computer Systems At Armenian State Engineering University,
Erewan
PhD student at the University Duisburg-Essen
Current position: Research associate t Business Department of Dortmund University of Applied Sciences;
member ofjoint BMBF research project IKAROS
Focus of research: Localization algorithms in WLAN systems

View publication stats

