              Journal of
              Sensor and
              Actuator Networks

Article
Visible Light Communications through Diffusive Illumination
of Sculptures in a Real Museum
Marco Meucci 1 , Marco Seminara 2 , Fabio Tarani 3 , Cristiano Riminesi 3 and Jacopo Catani 1,2, *

                                          1   National Institute of Optics, CNR (CNR-INO), 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy; marco.meucci@ino.cnr.it
                                          2   European Laboratory for NonLinear Spectroscopy (LENS), University of Florence,
                                              50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy; seminara@lens.unifi.it
                                          3   Institute of Heritage Science, CNR (CNR-ISPC), 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy; fabio.tarani@ispc.cnr.it (F.T.);
                                              cristiano.riminesi@ispc.cnr.it (C.R.)
                                          *   Correspondence: jacopo.catani@ino.cnr.it

                                          Abstract: The recent, massive diffusion of LED-based illumination devices makes Visible Light
                                          Communications (VLC) a widely recognised wireless communication technology with large potential
                                          impact in many indoor and outdoor applications. In the indoor scenario, one of the most promising
                                          VLC implementations is foreseen in museums, exhibitions and cultural heritage sites. In this context,
                                          digital data can be transmitted by the specific lighting system of each artwork and received by the
                                          nearby standing visitors, allowing a complete set of dedicated services such as augmented reality
                                          (AR) and real-time indoor positioning, exploiting the directionality of the optical channel. In this
                                work, we achieve, for the first time, VLC transmission through diffusive LED illumination of three-
         
                                          dimensional artworks (wooden and marble sculptures) in a real museum, exploiting the available
Citation: Meucci, M.; Seminara, M.;       LED illumination system, demonstrating the feasibility of VLC technology also when complex three-
Tarani, F.; Riminesi, C.; Catani, J.
                                          dimensional artworks, such as sculptures or bas-reliefs, are involved. In our experimental campaign,
Visible Light Communications
                                          performed inside the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella in Florence, we perform extensive Packet Error
through Diffusive Illumination of
                                          Rate (PER) and Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) tests on two important wooden and marble sculptures
Sculptures in a Real Museum. J. Sens.
                                          (Crucifix by Brunelleschi and the Holy Water Font by Bordoni, respectively), for different distances,
Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                          view angles and configurations, in order to mimic a wide set of situations that visitors may encounter
jsan10030045                              in a realistic scenario. We achieve successful VLC transmission for distances up to 8 m from artworks,
                                          at baud rate of 28 kBaud. We also provide detailed results on the characterization of the transmission
Academic Editors: Lei Shu, Stefan         Field of View (FoV) for our prototype, as well as the effect of side shifts of the observer’s position
Fischer, Joel J. P. C. Rodrigues, Adnan   on the quality of VLC transmission, providing essential information for future implementations
Al-Anbuky and Mário Alves                 of positioning protocols and dedicated services in realistic, indoor scenarios. Our work represents
                                          an important step forward towards the deployment of VLC technology in museums and, more in
Received: 25 May 2021                     general, it opens for far-reaching developments in a wide set of real indoor environments, including
Accepted: 27 June 2021
                                          the cultural heritage sector, where diffusive VLC links exploiting illumination of three-dimensional
Published: 7 July 2021
                                          objects could represent a ground-breaking innovation.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          Keywords: visible light communication; VLC; wireless communication; indoor localization; digital
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          cultural heritage; museums; Internet of Things
published maps and institutional affil-
iations.



                                          1. Introduction

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                               Visible Light Communication (VLC) is an emerging communication platform that
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          aims at simultaneously providing wireless connectivity along with lighting, using common
This article is an open access article
                                          LED sources [1,2]. This is typically achieved by encoding the digital information through
distributed under the terms and           intensity modulation of the light at frequencies which are not perceived by the human
conditions of the Creative Commons        eye [3].
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://          Unlike Radio-Frequency (RF) based communication technologies, VLC has unique
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          features, such as a high degree of physical security in the transfer of information given
4.0/).                                    by the spatial selectivity of the optical channel, the exploitation of a free and unlicensed



J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45. https://doi.org/10.3390/jsan10030045                                           https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jsan
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                           2 of 14




                                       frequency range, and a theoretical maximum throughput which is several orders of magni-
                                       tude higher by virtue of the optical carrier (430–790 THz) [4]. Furthermore, VLC offers the
                                       possibility to establish wireless links in critical environments (such as, e.g., aeroplanes or
                                       surgery rooms), where radio-frequency radiation is unsuitable due to possible interference
                                       with sensitive instruments, or in harsh environments, such as heavy industries, where RF
                                       links are hampered by presence of massive EM noise [4]. One of the keystones of VLC is its
                                       high degree of integrability in standard illumination equipment, so as to provide pervasive,
                                       distributed connectivity between white LED-based lamps and static and portable devices
                                       in domestic, public and industrial environments. The concept of light-fidelity (Li-Fi) [5] has
                                       also been coined, and refers in particular to systems whose purpose is to cooperate with
                                       or replace standard Wi-Fi technologies to attain higher speeds as compared to the current
                                       values obtainable with Wi-Fi [6]. An effective large-scale deployment of VLC technology
                                       in indoor environments could currently leverage on the massive diffusion of high-power,
                                       large-size, high-intensity, phosphorescent white LED sources, composed by a blue emitting
                                       LED substrate with a yellow conversion layer [7] and featuring several Watts per element
                                       as maximum attainable optical power. Two main factors make the implementation of fast
                                       VLC transmission systems on such kind of sources challenging. First, the large area of
                                       the LED chip, which is essential to achieve strong lighting levels, creates a large parasitic
                                       capacitance; second, the fluorescence process taking place in the conversion layer has a
                                       finite time-constant in the range 100–500 ns, depending on the type of fluorophore used [8].
                                       Both phenomena strongly limit the attainable modulation bandwidth, which hardly ex-
                                       ceeds the 1 MHz range [9]. One method to bypass the slow response of the fluorophores
                                       is to use a blue filter on the receiver, which is, however, unsuitable for realistic applica-
                                       tions as it involves a large loss of signal [10]. Seminal works have attained 1-Gb/s links
                                       using commercial white phosphorescent LEDs with high-order modulation schemes [11],
                                       very recently extended above the GHz range via complex pre-equalization schemes [12].
                                       Yet, these works deal mostly with laboratory implementations with a direct Line of Sight
                                       (LoS) configuration, and use blue filtering technique to reject low frequencies in the LED
                                       response. Demonstration of high-speed VLC connections using commercial white LEDs
                                       over distances of several meters in realistic scenarios, especially in absence of direct LoS
                                       links, still remains an open challenge.
                                             Noticeably enough, however, the benefits that VLC would deliver towards the long-
                                       sought Smart City and Industry 4.0 digital revolution are not only limited to large band-
                                       width data connections. For example, the possibility to shape the emission pattern of
                                       sources and the Field of View (FoV) of receivers in an easier way with respect to RF-based
                                       wireless connections, allows the realization of high-directional VLC links, where users can
                                       receive distinct information from each specific hotspot (LED lamp) which is casting the
                                       VLC signal. This feature paves the way to realization of novel dedicated services [13,14]
                                       and localization of users in indoor environments [15], not necessarily requiring a large
                                       data rate.
                                             Among the application fields where VLC technology features the most promising
                                       implications stands the cultural heritage sector, in particular museums and exhibitions,
                                       where visitors could obtain real-time, dedicated digital information on specific artworks by
                                       means of directional VLC transmitters exploiting the LED-based lighting infrastructure.
                                       Furthermore, it would also be possible to implement effective visitors positioning and
                                       tracking protocols, aiming, e.g., at the intelligent regulation of user flows within the
                                       building [16–19]. The first works in the literature dealing with museum environments
                                       essentially reported proofs of principle in laboratory setups. For example, in [20] an audio
                                       information stream is used as modulation signal to vary the intensity of a light emitted by
                                       an optical source. In [21], the authors implement a VLC-based surveillance system capable
                                       of detecting inadequate behaviours of visitors, which also provides information about
                                       artworks with very slow bit-rates despite the LoS configuration. The LoS configuration
                                       poses severe limits to realistic VLC applications, as it requires a direct alignment of the
                                       receiving devices with the VLC hotspot. A recent work demonstrated for the first time
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                            3 of 14




                                       the possibility to implement VLC transmission to users in real museum environments
                                       using the light diffused by paintings in a real, non-Line-of-Sight (nLoS) configuration [22].
                                       Such characterization is limited to two-dimensional (planar) artworks (mural and wood
                                       paintings, canvas), and reports no hints on the feasibility of VLC links when more complex
                                       artworks (such as sculptures) are involved. Hence, the large-scale deployment of VLC
                                       technology in museums asks for further investigation, so as to assess whether effective,
                                       nLoS-VLC links could also be established through artworks of a three-dimensional nature,
                                       such as sculptures and bas-reliefs.
                                             To this scope, in this paper we report for the first time the successful realization of
                                       VLC links in a real museum, exploiting diffusive illumination of wood and stone sculptures
                                       placed in their original locations (see Figure 1a) In particular, we have carried out an exten-
                                       sive characterization of our recently developed low-cost VLC system in terms of optical and
                                       telecom performances, exploiting nLoS diffusive illumination of two different sculpture
                                       masterpieces by Filippo Brunelleschi and Pagno Gherardo Bordoni inside the Basilica of
                                       Santa Maria Novella in Florence, Italy. We provide for an extensive characterization of the
                                       optical channel exploiting the actual LED lighting system of Basilica (Figure 1b), both in
                                       terms of intensity Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and Packet Error Rate (PER) patterns as
                                       a function of position, relative angle and distance from the three-dimensional artworks.
                                       Our system attains effective VLC transmission for distances up to 8 m for the Crucifix by
                                       Brunelleschi, and up to more than 4 m for the Holy Water Font by Bordoni. Noticeably, ef-
                                       fective VLC links can be established for all the investigated view angles up to ±90° around
                                       the latter artwork (which features a high degree of cylindrical symmetry), and up to 8 m
                                       for the former sculpture, featuring very different make and location. We also provide an
                                       experimental determination of the sensitivity of our system to angular misalignment by de-
                                       termining the receiver’s FoV in terms of VLC transmission quality. Our work demonstrates
                                       the possibility to exploit VLC optical links using real LED lamps and diffusive illumination
                                       of real three-dimensional artworks, paving the way to full-fledged deployment of VLC
                                       technology in museum applications. We note that our results could also be relevant for
                                       several fields, beyond the pristine cultural heritage sector, as the possibility to exploit
                                       diffusive illumination of three-dimensional artifacts to cast data could be beneficial in
                                       indoor and outdoor public structures, e.g., buildings, offices, hospitals, industries.
                                             The paper is organised as follows: in Section 2, we describe the experimental VLC
                                       setup; in Section 3, we detail the experimental campaign carried out in the Basilica; in
                                       Section 4, we report and discuss the experimental results; in Section 5, we give conclusions
                                       and perspectives for our work.
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                               4 of 14




                                       Figure 1. (a) Overview of VLC experimental setup used in the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella;
                                       (b) LED light sources used as TX stage and (c) custom RX stage, with shield tube for FoV adjustment
                                       visible. D represents the input tube diameter, L its length. (d) Data frame composition (NRZ-OOK
                                       with Manchester encoding) used in the experiments (see text).

                                       2. Experimental VLC Setup
                                            With reference to Figure 2, our VLC transmitter (TX) is based on a low-cost digital
                                       microcontroller encoder, Arduino DUE, featuring an internal clock frequency of 84 MHz.
                                       The digital board, allowing for a minimum observed resolution of ∼1 µs in the generation
                                       of the Tx signals , supplies and modulates, by means of a customized current driver, a
                                       two-lamp high-power white LED source used for artworks lighting (Exenia Museo Mini 2L,
                                       with nominal power 9W × 2). The driver (see [23] for details) adds a 0–200% AC current
                                       modulation on top of the DC nominal 100% value of 0.7 A, required to provide the nominal
                                       light intensity on the artworks. This modulation scheme delivers the maximum possible
                                       modulation index, preserving the average brightness without appreciably affecting the
                                       LEDs lifetime [24,25].
                                            The system transmits a continuous stream of 9-byte data packets at a baudrate of
                                       28 kBaud. The packet includes a 3-byte pre-equalization frame, a 2-byte synchronization
                                       preamble and 4-byte data payload (see Figure 1d). The digital message is entirely generated
                                       by the Arduino board and sent to the high-power current modulator for injection into
                                       the LED source. The digital modulation is performed using Non-Return-to-Zero On-Off
                                       Keying (NRZ-OOK) scheme with Manchester encoding [3], which ensures a constant
                                       average illumination of the artworks.
                                            The information carried by the light diffused from artworks is collected by an ad-
                                       hoc optical receiver (RX), consisting of a high-gain, AC-coupled photo-diode (Thorlabs
                                       PDA100A2, active area 75 mm2 ) mounted on a precision two-axis rotation mount for
                                       precise angular alignment. The AC filtering stage is embedded in the hardware before the
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                5 of 14




                                       first transimpedance amplifier (TIA) stage (see [23] for further technical details), based on
                                       a high-speed op-amp with 130 MHz gain-bandwidth product. This effectively suppresses
                                       spurious DC stray light components at frequencies below 1 KHz such as sunlight, other
                                       artificial light sources, or the DC component of the illumination light source itself, so that
                                       the gain of the amplification stage can be increased to high values without incurring in
                                       DC saturation.
                                             The photoreceiver amplified signal is digitised by a single-threshold Schmitt-trigger
                                       comparator stage and decoded by an Arduino DUE-based digital RX board. The firmware
                                       performs a bit-wise comparison on each received packet, discarding the pre-equalization
                                       bits, and comparing the preambles and data payload against a predefined message. PER is
                                       calculated by definition as the ratio of received packets featuring at least one wrong bit in
                                       the data payload to the total number of packets received showing correct preambles.
                                             The FoV of the photoreceiver is physically limited at approximately 60° by a tube of
                                       diameter D = 25 mm and length L = 20 mm (Figure 1c), placed ahead of the active area of
                                       the photo-diode, aligned with the optical axis of RX. This configuration blocks possible
                                       light components impinging on the RX stage with large angles with respect to the optical
                                       axis, hence allowing to collect most of the light diffused by a specific artwork, but limiting
                                       at the same time the interference effects and crosstalks caused by signals cast by nearby
                                       VLC hotspots. As already observed [22], the proper choice of the RX FoV is a key element
                                       for future implementations of dedicated services and indoor positioning through diffusive
                                       VLC links.




                                       Figure 2. Hardware blocks in our VLC system. Left part (TX): The transmitter block includes the
                                       same light source used in the museum, supplied with a current modulator controlled by a digital
                                       encoder. Right part (RX): the block includes a modified commercial photodetector, with tailored FoV,
                                       and a digital decoder based on Arduino DUE.

                                       3. Measurements Overview
                                            In order to provide a complete characterization of VLC links and to analyse the
                                       possible implementation in real museum scenarios, it is important to also assess three-
                                       dimensional artworks. The experimental campaign has been carried out in the Basilica
                                       of Santa Maria Novella in Florence, Italy, which hosts a large set of heritage masterpieces.
                                       The artworks characterised here for VLC transmission are the wooden Crucifix by Filippo
                                       Brunelleschi (1415), preserved in the Gondi chapel, and the Holy Water Font by Pagno
                                       Gherardo Bordoni (XVII century). The sketch of the experimental setup is shown in
                                       Figure 3. These measurement configurations have been chosen in order to encompass a
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                   6 of 14




                                       large set of possible scenarios that visitors may encounter in actual conditions, taking
                                       into account the relative position of each artwork with respect to visitors. With reference
                                       to Figure 3, the centered configuration is obtained by aiming the detector towards the
                                       geometric center of the artwork (corresponding to a vertical angle of about 20° ), whereas
                                       in the Flat configuration, the detector optical axis is parallel to the floor (0° vertical angle).
                                       The LED sources positioning is different for the two artworks. For the Holy Water Font,
                                       the LED light spot is placed on the floor at a distance of 1 m, whereas for the Crucifix, it is
                                       placed behind the altar (see Figure 1a), 1.5 m from the floor (same height as the crucifix
                                       baseline), and at 1.5 m from the crucifix. The light cones illuminate the artworks from
                                       below, in order to avoid undesirable flaring and disturbances to the visitors, as no direct
                                       light is cast or reflected towards the visitors’ eyes. In this configuration, indeed, most of
                                       the light is reflected upwards, so that only the diffused component reaches an observer
                                       placed in front of the artwork. Our RX stage is placed in front of each masterpiece at a
                                       height of 1.5 m from the floor, so as to mimic the position of a hypothetical observer. Given
                                       the configuration adopted, the detector mainly receives the diffused light component and
                                       the transmission is performed using a pristine nLoS, diffusive optical channel.




                                       Figure 3. Layout for SNR and PER measurements (see text): (a) polar, (b) FoV, (c) lateral displacement.

                                             Measurements are performed on different experimental grids for the two artworks, in
                                       order to emulate realistic visitors position and view angles in the allowed observation area.
                                       The Holy Water Font (see Section 4.2) is a three-dimensional marble sculpture with a high
                                       degree of cylindrical symmetry, and has a large observation range due to its central location
                                       in the main aisle of the Basilica. This allows us to perform tests for angles up to 180° around
                                       the artwork itself, and the configuration that was considered to be the most insightful is the
                                       polar one (Figure 3a); we perform PER tests and intensity map measurements by recording
                                       the amplitude of the received VLC signal at RX as a function of the angle between receiver
                                       and artwork, for different values of distance.
                                             Conversely, the Crucifix stands by the back wall of a chapel inaccessible to the visitor,
                                       who must keep a minimum distance of 6 m. The polar measurement is rendered inadequate
                                       by this constraint, so that we perform the experimental determination of the FoV of the
                                       receiver stage (Figure 3b) by scanning the vertical RX orientation angle with respect to the
                                       flat orientation. This measurement provides relevant information on the effect of angular
                                       misalignment between the RX optical axis and the artwork, which is a key element in view
                                       of the deployment of VLC handheld RX devices. On this artwork, we also characterise the
                                       effect on the quality of VLC transmission due to lateral displacements with respect to the
                                       ideal position of an observer placed in front of the artwork (Figure 3c).
                                             For the different configurations, we characterise the performance of our VLC system
                                       both in terms of SNR and PER value. We define the SNR as the ratio between the half-
                                       amplitude of the VLC signal, recorded after the photodetector with a 200-MHz, 2.5-GS/s
                                       digital oscilloscope (Tektronix MDO3024), and the corresponding Root Mean Square (RMS)
                                       noise value, which amounts to 2.2 mV. PER measurements are performed by sending
                                       up to 5 × 105 packets, so that the error-free communication threshold, corresponding to
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                           7 of 14




                                       the minimum detectable PER, is 10−5 . The RX gain is set to 50, which is the maximum
                                       compatible with the electronic bandwidth required by the chosen baudrate of 28 kbaud,
                                       effectively acting as a 30 KHz analog low-pass filter on the received signal). We chose such
                                       baudrate as the best trade off between communication data rate and range of our VLC
                                       system, as higher baudrates would require lower RX gains, hence reducing the maximum
                                       reach of the VLC signal in front of the artworks [22]. Packets are spaced out by 3 ms
                                       (inter-packet delay, IPD), where no transmission is happening. In case of lower baudrates
                                       or longer inter-packet delays, IPD could also be filled with continuous modulation of the
                                       carrier in order to avoid potential flickering perception, which is, however, not appreciable
                                       with the tested baudrates. We note that the need for using a lower baudrate as compared to
                                       largest baudrates attainable by our system [26], is yielded by the nLoS configuration. This
                                       condition generally involves lower signal with respect to a direct LoS configuration, hence
                                       requiring larger gains of RX stage. This, in turn, limits the maximum attainable electronic
                                       bandwidth of the RX stage itself. It could be interesting, in future works, to address the
                                       opportunity to embed automatic gain control stages after TIA.
                                            In order to provide a further, semi-quantitative evaluation of the combined effects
                                       of channel noise, intersymbol interference, and jitter in the VLC channel, we report, in
                                       addition to PER performances and intensity SNR maps, the eye diagrams obtained for two
                                       different SNR values, which are a general feature of our system and are valid for both the
                                       Crucifix and the stout.

                                       4. Results and Discussion
                                       4.1. PER Analysis and Quality of Communication Channel
                                            PER is a common metric to assess the communication performances of communication
                                       systems, and in general its value relates to the SNR of the received signal [27]. For this
                                       reason, a convenient and reliable way to evaluate the communication performances of
                                       our system is to analyze the amplitude of the received signal on the whole experimental
                                       grid, for various relative positions and angles between TX and RX. Assuming a uniform
                                       distribution of the erroneous bits on the received packets, the PER can be directly related
                                       to the Bit Error Rate (BER) via PER = 1 − (1 − BER)N , where N is the number of bits
                                       constituting packet [28]. Considering pure additive white Gaussian noise, we can assume
                                       BER to be related to the SNR of the received signal through the well-known Q-function:
                                       BER = Q(SNR) [27]. Combining the previous equations, PER can then be expressed as a
                                       function of received SNR as:

                                                                                                      S/2 − T
                                                                                                            
                                                                                N             1
                                                       PER = 1 − (1 − Q(SNR)) = 1 − 1 − erfc √                    ,             (1)
                                                                                              2         2σRMS
                                       where S is the amplitude of the signal received and σRMS the standard deviation of the
                                       background noise. T is a parameter which takes into account the presence of a finite
                                       threshold in the detection of the VLC signal, intentionally introduced by our RX stage so
                                       as to mitigate the effect of channel noise, which would otherwise induce false triggering
                                       and lead to reduced transmission performances. In Figure 4a, we show measured PER as a
                                       function of received SNR. The green circles are the experimental data. Horizontal error bars
                                       correspond to uncertainty in detection of signal amplitude with the oscilloscope, whereas
                                       vertical error bars, negligible on this scale, are related to the observed variance of the PER
                                       in repeated experiments for a certain position of the receiver. As our data clearly show, our
                                       system is capable of attaining error-free communications in diffusive, nLoS configuration
                                       for SNR > 22 dB, whereas successful communication (PER < 0.1) could be established for
                                       SNR exceeding 15 dB. Our data are also compared against predictions of a best fitting
                                       curve obtained through Equation (1) (red line in Figure 4). Our data are nicely fitted by
                                       predictions, thus confirming the hypothesis of additive white Gaussian noise affecting the
                                       VLC channel.
                                            Figure 4 also shows the recorded eye patterns, in both low-signal (SNR = 11 dB,
                                       PER ≈ 0.5, panel (b)) and high-signal (SNR = 22 dB, error-free, panel (c)) configurations.In
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                    8 of 14




                                       both panels, we report traces corresponding to three different signals. The top trace (TX)
                                       corresponds to the TX signal generated by the Arduino DUE board, the central trace (RX)
                                       shows the analog output of the photoreceiver after TIA, and the bottom trace (digitized)
                                       shows the output of the comparator stage at receiver. The acquisition is self-triggered
                                       on the RX signal, so that the horizontal spread of transition edges in the digitised signal
                                       provides indication on the jitter in the reconstructed VLC digital signal, which depends on
                                       the signal quality and on the intrinsic ultimate time resolution of the Arduino DUE digital
                                       pins, which is of the order of 1 µs. Referring to the high-level signal eye diagram (Figure 4c),
                                       we observe a jitter of ∼2 µs on the TX trace and about twice this value in the digitised signal,
                                       which contains a larger amount of noise with respect to the TX. We remark that, in typical
                                       indoor environments, where flaring and seeing effects due to density fluctuations of the air
                                       can be neglected, TIA noise typically represents one of the largest noise components [29], as
                                       the small current generated in the photodiode makes TIA susceptible to thermal and shot
                                       noise, converting it to random jitter [30]. In the low-level signal configuration (Figure 4b)
                                       the RX trace features a much less defined eye pattern, and the signal amplitude approaches
                                       a value close to the comparator threshold T. This induces a larger jitter in the digitised
                                       signal (∼8 µs). However, a dedicated high-frequency digital filtering process introduced
                                       in our software improves the discrimination of transitions in the digitised signal, and
                                       successful VLC communications could be established even for SNR as low as 15 dB.




                                       Figure 4. (a) Example of measured PER as a function of SNR on the received amplitude. Green
                                       circles correspond to experimental data, with horizontal error bars showing the uncertainty in the
                                       amplitude measurement. The vertical error bars are due to the variance on the number of wrong
                                       packets on consecutive measurements and are smaller than the symbol size. The red line is the best fit
                                       curve by the model given in the text. The shaded area represents the error-free region (higher limit)
                                       given by the maximum number of packets used in the tests. (b,c) Heat maps showing eye-diagrams
                                       for PER > 0.1 with SNR = 11 dB (b), and error-free communication achieved with SNR = 22 dB (c).
                                       Three traces are shown: TX, RX, and the (digitized) signal after comparator. The horizontal scale is
                                       4 µs. The acquisition is self-triggered on the RX signal, so that the horizontal spread of the digitized
                                       signal corresponds to a jitter of 1–4 µs in the reconstructed VLC digital signal, depending on the
                                       SNR level.

                                       4.2. Bordoni’s Font: Polar Snr and Per Maps
                                            The polar amplitude SNR and PER measurements for the Holy Water Font (Figure 5a)
                                       have been performed by scanning the horizontal angular position of the RX stage around
                                       the artwork, for two different radial distances (2 m and 4 m), and in an angular range of
                                       [−90°, +90°] with respect to the frontal position (Figure 3a). The photodetector is always
                                       oriented towards the artwork, and during the horizontal angular scan, the vertical angle is
                                       fixed in such a way that the RX stage always receives the maximum diffused light from the
                                       artwork. This configuration is referred to as Optimal in the following. Both horizontal and
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                9 of 14




                                       vertical angles are measured by the two orthogonal precision rotation stages equipping the
                                       RX stage (Section 2).
                                             SNR and PER maps are reported in Figure 5b,c, respectively. Noticeably, at the regular
                                       observation distance of 2 m, error-free communication is obtained in the whole horizontal
                                       range [−90° ,+90° ], with SNR always exceeding 25 dB. As expected, both SNR and PER
                                       values are worse at 4 m, as a consequence of the decreased diffused intensity. Noticeably
                                       enough, PER ≤ 10−1 is still achieved at 4 m in the range [−90° ,+90° ] (minimum SNR = 3.5),
                                       and error-free communications are achieved at 0° radial angle (named frontal configuration
                                       hereinafter).
                                             We note that the analyzed sculpture has a much smaller frontal extension with respect
                                       to the planar paintings reported in [22]. In the former case, therefore, one could intuitively
                                       expect a globally lower SNR value recorded at a given distance and for the same illumina-
                                       tion level as compared to the latter, as the global amount of diffused light collected by RX is
                                       in general proportional to the size of the illuminated surface. Furthermore, the cylindrical
                                       diffusive surface tends to disfavor back diffusion of light at small angles, which is instead
                                       favoured by a plane configuration, due to the Lambertian shape of the diffusion lobe [31].
                                       Following the pristine geometric considerations above, one could naively expect reduced
                                       SNR values even in the frontal configuration with respect to the two-dimensional paintings
                                       case. However, our data show a non-trivial behaviour of the SNR maps for the three
                                       dimensional sculpture. To get more insight in the differences yielded by two- and three-
                                       dimensional artworks in VLC performances, we report in Figure 6 a direct comparison
                                       between our PER characterization for the sculpture, along with a similar characterization
                                       for the case of the plane mural painting Holy Trinity by Masaccio [22], both performed
                                       at 4 m distance. Panel a) reports the PER data (circles), along with a spline interpolation
                                       for both painting and sculpture case, whereas panel (b) highlights specific PER values
                                       corresponding to relevant angular positions in tabular form. Differently from expectations,
                                       the Holy Water Font sculpture features a better SNR (22 dB) in the frontal configuration as
                                       compared to the mural painting case, achieving error-free communication. Furthermore,
                                       better PER performances are maintained in a ± 15° angular range (see panel a), whilst
                                       PER performances get worse at large angles with respect to the painting case, still allowing
                                       successful packet delivery in the whole 180° angular range.




                                       Figure 5. (a) Bordoni’s Holy Water Font; (b) polar map of the received SNR amplitude value consider-
                                       ing a noise of σRMS = 2.2 mV. A 10 dB SNR is still guaranteed at 4 m and with 75° misalignment.
                                       Black dots represent the experimental data, whereas the colour map is a cubic spline interpolation.
                                       (c) Communication performances in terms of PER at 2 m (orange area) and 4 m (green area) as a
                                       function of the radial angle. At 2 m, an error-free communication has been performed for all the
                                       angles, while at 4 m a PER < 10−1 is always guaranteed.
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                   10 of 14




                                       Figure 6. (a) Comparison between PER values at 4 m for the wall painting (Holy Trinity by Masaccio,
                                       blue circles) and for marble sculpture (Holy Water Font by Bordoni, red circles). Solid lines are spline
                                       interpolation to data. (b) Tabular comparison for relevant angles of 0°, 60°, and 90°.

                                             The peculiar shape of the recorded PER pattern shown in Figure 6 can be ascribed
                                       to the geometric differences between artworks discussed above, and to the nature of the
                                       finished surface of the sculpture, whose white marble finish strongly limits absorption
                                       effects of visible light as compared to the coloured painting. Moreover, the reduced distance
                                       between the spotlight and the sculpture leads to a larger light irradiance as compared to
                                       the paintings case. The combination of such features makes the performances of our VLC
                                       prototype with sculptures better than initially expected for the frontal configuration, yet
                                       allowing for successful communication at very large view angles. A detailed prediction of
                                       the emission lobes in case of realistic, three-dimensional diffusive surfaces requires further
                                       studies in terms of optical models, nevertheless our results highlight the possibility to
                                       establish effective VLC communication using diffusive illumination of three-dimensional
                                       artworks in museum settings.
                                             As our channel is a non-LoS, diffusive one, we argue that IEEE 802.15.7 PHY V type
                                       for diffused light sources [32] could be the most adequate to encompass applications
                                       like those described in our work. As mode 6 of PHY V also embeds OOK Manchester
                                       as modulation/encoding, our results show that, despite the relatively low baudrate of
                                       28 kBaud, our system is highly outperforming the bandwidth of 2.2 kHz requested by
                                       PHY V mode 6. By properly setting (in future developments) the software to include, e.g.,
                                       Hamming error correction codes, we expect to attain bitrates much higher than the 400 bps
                                       which are requested by IEEE 802.15.7 PHY V.

                                       4.3. Brunelleschi’S Crucifix: FoV and Side Shift
                                             As described in Section 3, the wooden Crucifix sculpture by Brunelleschi (Figures 1a and 7a)
                                       is located in a niche by the back wall of a chapel, so that visitors can only move in a very narrow
                                       angular range in front of the artwork and must keep a minimum distance of 6 m. For this
                                       reason, we did not perform polar tests for this artwork. However, we exploited the Crucifix
                                       to perform FoV and side displacement sensitivity tests on the quality of VLC transmission.
                                       Indeed, such tests provide precious insights about the capability to discern data fluxes
                                       coming from the neighbouring VLC hotspots (artworks) and, therefore, on the potential
                                       use of VLC for dedicated services and localization.
                                             Figure 7b shows experimental PER values in centered configuration as a function
                                       of horizontal angular misalignment of the RX optical axis with respect to the artwork.
                                       Acceptable packet reception (PER > 0.1) occurs in an angular range [−10°, +15°], yielding
                                       an effective FoV of 25°for telecom performances of our VLC system. The small angular
                                       asymmetry (∼5° ) is most probably due to the asymmetry of the artwork and of the
                                       illumination pattern of the LED sources. We also remark that a contribution to the VLC
                                       signal is provided by the stone wall composing the background of the sculpture. This
                                       suggests that positioning three-dimensional sculptures near walls could improve the
                                       performance of VLC communication. We note that this behaviour is a peculiar feature of
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                  11 of 14




                                       VLC as, differently from other RF-based communication protocols, multipath interference
                                       is not necessarily detrimental for PER performances, since the induced phase shift in the
                                       OOK-NRZ VLC signal is negligible for bit rates up to hundreds of Mbps [23]. In order
                                       to get relevant insights on the possibility to exploit VLC in real museums to provide for
                                       localization and dedicated services, we note that the projection of the measured FoV angle
                                       on the background wall at 6 m covers a horizontal range of [−1.06, +1.6] m. This range
                                       provides an useful indication on the minimum separation (∼2.6 m) required between
                                       artworks to avoid interference with datastreams cast by nearby VLC hotspots. Indeed,
                                       VLC-enabled artworks placed outside this range would not induce appreciable interference
                                       effects in the datastream received at RX. Figure 7c shows a similar characterisation as
                                       a function of vertical RX orientation angle (see Figure 3c). 0° corresponds to the flat
                                       orientation of RX. Good packet reception (PER > 0.1) occurs in the vertical angular range
                                       [+10°, +30°]. The same analysis as above yields a minimum required vertical spacing of
                                       artworks of ∼2 m.
                                             As anticipated in Section 3, another important aspect addressed by our experimental
                                       campaign is the effect of lateral shift in the RX (observer) position on the telecom perfor-
                                       mances of the VLC system. We report such measurement in Figure 7d, where PER values
                                       are shown as a function of the lateral displacement of RX with respect to the frontal position
                                       (see also Figure 3c), for various distances. Open circles show the measured PER at 6 m (red)
                                       and 8 m (cyan) distance, in centered configuration with 0° horizontal RX angle. Interest-
                                       ingly, despite the larger attained distance and differently from what has been observed
                                       in the case of other artworks (i.e., the mural painting by Masaccio (Figure 6 of [22]), we
                                       record a rather weak effect of lateral displacement on PER. This feature can be ascribed to
                                       the peculiar position of the sculpture, placed inside a narrow, 5 m long chapel delimited by
                                       diffusive/reflective stone and marble walls (see also Figure 1a). In such layout, similarly
                                       to what has been observed earlier in a different (vehicular) VLC setup [24], reflection
                                       and diffusion from nearby surfaces help redirect the diffused modulated light, hence in-
                                       creasing the VLC SNR values in the measurements grid. This observation suggests that
                                       effects of reflections from additional surfaces surrounding VLC hotspots could also play a
                                       non-negligible role in position tracking protocols and dedicated services based on VLC
                                       diffusive-channel VLC, and definitely deserve further studies in relevant scenarios.




                                       Figure 7. Experimental determination of effective RX FoV in terms of PER performances. Data report
                                       measured PER values relative to Brunelleschi’s Crucifix (panel (a)) as a function of the horizontal
                                       (b) an vertical (c) angular orientation of RX axis, at 6 m distance. Panel (d) reports the measured PER
                                       for side shifts of ±2 m, at 6 m (red) and 8 m (cyan) distance from artwork.

                                       5. Conclusions
                                            In this work we report, for the first time, successful VLC data transfer exploiting
                                       standard LED illumination of real three-dimensional sculptures in a museum. We present
                                       a detailed characterisation of our novel low-cost VLC prototype which uses a diffusive,
                                       nLoS channel through the standard LED-based lighting system in the famous Basilica of
                                       Santa Maria Novella in Florence, Italy. In particular, our experimental campaign explores
                                       the performances of the prototype on two different sculpture masterpieces (the wooden
                                       Crucifix by Filippo Brunelleschi and the marble Holy Water Font by Bordoni), in their original
                                       location. These artworks have been chosen for their different positioning, material and
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                   12 of 14




                                       shape, so as to encompass a comprehensive set of conditions found in actual museums.
                                       We perform extensive tests, recording PER and SNR maps as a function of the position of
                                       the RX stage, mimicking realistic viewpoints of the observers. Our results show that the
                                       system achieves successful VLC data transfer at baudrates up to 28 kBaud for distances
                                       of up to 8 m, and in a with angles between the LED source axis and the observer LoS
                                       up to 90°. For what concerns the font, which features a white marble surface and a
                                       high degree of cylindrical symmetry, we highlight the possibility to establish error-free
                                       communications (PER < 10−5 ) in the whole 180° angular range, at a realistic distance of
                                       2 m. We show how the three-dimensional nature of the artifact affects the VLC channel,
                                       finding a non-trivial shape of the PER lobe as a function of the angular position of the
                                       observer which is quite different when compared to plane artworks (paintings, canvas,
                                       etc.). In the case of the wooden Crucifix by Brunelleschi, located inside a dedicated stone
                                       chapel where the minimum allowed observation distance is 6 m, we show the feasibility
                                       of successful VLC communication up to 8 m, with best observed PER ' 4 × 10−2 at 6 m,
                                       which could be improved further by introducing proper software Error Correction Coding
                                       (ECC) in our prototype. For this artwork, we also provide for a detailed characterization
                                       of effective communication FoV of our system. We observe vertical (horizontal) FoV
                                       values of 20° (25° ) for the reference value PER = 0.1, suggesting a minimum separation
                                       of ∼2 m between artworks, in similar illumination and distance conditions, so as to allow
                                       effective discrimination of VLC signals received from nearby artworks. This is an essential
                                       parameter to assess the capability of VLC diffusive communication systems to provide
                                       indoor positioning and position-based services to users. We also quantify the effects of
                                       lateral displacements in the observer position on the quality of VLC transmission, showing
                                       the effect of side walls in enhancing the SNR level of VLC signal due to phase-insensitive
                                       multipath reflection mechanisms. Our results demonstrate, for the first time, the possibility
                                       to implement VLC wireless links through three-dimensional artworks in museums by
                                       exploiting standard LED illumination infrastructures. This achievement is an essential step
                                       towards the full-fledged deployment of VLC technology in the cultural heritage sector,
                                       where sculptures and bas-reliefs are widespread, and completes the characterization of
                                       VLC links recently performed on two-dimensional artworks (paintings, canvas) [22]. Our
                                       results could also have sizeable impact in diverse indoor and outdoor application scenarios
                                       where VLC nLoS channels could play a fundamental role by exploiting diffusion from
                                       non-planar objects to cast wireless data to users (e.g., shops, hospitals, offices, industries).

                                       Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.M., M.S., F.T., C.R. and J.C.; methodology, M.M., M.S.
                                       and J.C.; software, J.C.; validation, C.R. and J.C.; formal analysis, M.M., M.S., F.T., C.R. and J.C.;
                                       investigation, M.M., M.S. and J.C.; resources, C.R. and J.C.; data curation, M.S. and M.M.; original
                                       draft preparation, M.M. and J.C.; supervision, J.C.; funding acquisition, C.R. and J.C. All authors
                                       have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                       Funding: This work has been carried out under partial financial support of project MIUR PON 2017
                                       ARS01_00917 “OK-INSAID”, MIUR FOE Progetto Premiale 2015 “OpenLab 2”, MIUR PON 2014-2020
                                       "DARIAH-IT", and H2020-INFRAIA-2019-1 “IPERION HS” (GA 871034).
                                       Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                       Data Availability Statement: Data available on request due to restrictions. The data presented in
                                       this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available
                                       due to privacy.
                                       Acknowledgments: This work is performed by CNR-INO VLC Lab and CNR-ISPC in collaboration
                                       with European Laboratory for NonLinear Spectroscopy (LENS). All of the artworks shown or
                                       represented in our work are property of Fondo Edifici di Culto, Ministero dell’Interno. The authors wish
                                       to thank Opera per Santa Maria Novella in Firenze and in particular Archt. F. Sgambelluri for valuable
                                       and constant support during the organization and execution of the whole campaign. Authors
                                       would also like to thank the company Fagioli&Cappelli srl for providing the LED lamps used in the
                                       experiments, and all members of the VisiCoRe joint laboratory for insightful discussions.
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                                13 of 14




                                       Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.    O’Brien, D.C.; Zeng, L.; Le-Minh, H.; Faulkner, G.; Walewski, J.W.; Randel, S. Visible light communications: Challenges
      and possibilities. In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 19th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
      Communications, Cannes, France, 15–18 September 2008; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
2.    Chow, C.W.; Yeh, C.H.; Liu, Y. Optical Wireless Communications (OWC)—Technologies and Applications. In Proceedings of the
      2020 Opto-Electronics and Communications Conference (OECC), Taipei, Taiwan, 4–8 October 2020; pp. 1–3. [CrossRef]
3.    Rajagopal, S.; Roberts, R.D.; Lim, S. IEEE 802.15.7 visible light communication: Modulation schemes and dimming support. IEEE
      Commun. Mag. 2012, 50, 72–82. [CrossRef]
4.    Khan, L.U. Visible light communication: Applications, architecture, standardization and research challenges. Digit. Commun.
      Netw. 2017, 3, 78–88. [CrossRef]
5.    Haas, H.; Yin, L.; Wang, Y.; Chen, C. What is LiFi? J. Light. Technol. 2016, 34, 1533–1544. [CrossRef]
6.    Tsonev, D.; Chun, H.; Rajbhandari, S.; McKendry, J.J.D.; Videv, S.; Gu, E.; Haji, M.; Watson, S.; Kelly, A.E.; Faulkner, G.; et al.
      A 3-Gb/s Single-LED OFDM-Based Wireless VLC Link Using a Gallium Nitride µLED. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 2014,
      26, 637–640. [CrossRef]
7.    Steigerwald, D.A.; Bhat, J.C.; Collins, D.; Fletcher, R.M.; Holcomb, M.O.; Ludowise, M.J.; Martin, P.S.; Rudaz, S.L. Illumination
      with solid state lighting technology. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 2002, 8, 310–320. [CrossRef]
8.    Vitasek, J.; Jargus, J.; Hejduk, S.; Stratil, T.; Latal, J.; Vasinek, V. Phosphor decay measurement and its influence on communication
      properties. In Proceedings of the 2017 19th International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), Girona,
      Catalonia, Spain, 2–6 July 2017; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
9.    Grubor, J.; Lee, S.C.J.; Langer, K.; Koonen, T.; Walewski, J.W. Wireless High-Speed Data Transmission with Phosphorescent
      White-Light LEDs. In Proceedings of the 33rd European Conference and Exhibition of Optical Communication—Post-Deadline
      Papers (published 2008), Berlin, Germany, 16–20 September 2007; pp. 1–2.
10.   Huang, X.; Wang, Z.; Shi, J.; Wang, Y.; Chi, N. 1.6 Gbit/s phosphorescent white LED based VLC transmission using a cascaded
      pre-equalization circuit and a differential outputs PIN receiver. Opt. Express 2015, 23, 22034–22042. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.   Khalid, A.M.; Cossu, G.; Corsini, R.; Choudhury, P.; Ciaramella, E. 1-Gb/s Transmission Over a Phosphorescent White LED by
      Using Rate-Adaptive Discrete Multitone Modulation. IEEE Photonics J. 2012, 4, 1465–1473. [CrossRef]
12.   Zhang, H.; Yang, A.; Feng, L.; Guo, P. Gb/s Real-Time Visible Light Communication System Based on White LEDs Using T-Bridge
      Cascaded Pre-Equalization Circuit. IEEE Photonics J. 2018, 10, 1–7. [CrossRef]
13.   Al-Sarawi, S.; Anbar, M.; Alieyan, K.; Alzubaidi, M. Internet of Things (IoT) communication protocols: Review. In Proceedings
      of the 2017 8th International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT), Amman, Jordan, 17–18 May 2017; pp. 685–690.
      [CrossRef]
14.   Samuel, S.S.I. A review of connectivity challenges in IoT-smart home. In Proceedings of the 2016 3rd MEC International
      Conference on Big Data and Smart City (ICBDSC), Muscat, Oman, 15–16 March 2016; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
15.   Luo, J.; Fan, L.; Li, H. Indoor Positioning Systems Based on Visible Light Communication: State of the Art. IEEE Commun. Surv.
      Tutor. 2017, 19, 2871–2893. [CrossRef]
16.   Pergoloni, S.; Mohamadi, Z.; Vegni, A.M.; Ghassemlooy, Z.; Biagi, M. Visible Light indoor positioning through colored LEDs. In
      Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), Paris, France, 21–25
      May 2017; pp. 150–155. [CrossRef]
17.   Cosmas, J.; Meunier, B.; Ali, K.; Jawad, N.; Meng, H.; Goutagneux, F.; Legale, E.; Satta, M.; Jay, P.; Zhang, X.; et al. 5G Internet
      of radio light services for Musée de la Carte à Jouer. In Proceedings of the 2018 Global LIFI Congress (GLC), Paris, France,
      8–9 February 2018; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
18.   Gökrem, L.; Durgun, M.; Durgun, Y. Indoor Location Control with Visible Light Communication. In Proceedings of the 2019 3rd
      International Conference on Advanced Information and Communications Technologies (AICT), Lviv, Ukraine, 2–6 July 2019;
      pp. 314–316. [CrossRef]
19.   Shi, L.; Shi, D.; Zhang, X.; Meunier, B.; Zhang, H.; Wang, Z.; Vladimirescu, A.; Li, W.; Zhang, Y.; Cosmas, J.; et al. 5G Internet of
      Radio Light Positioning System for Indoor Broadcasting Service. IEEE Trans. Broadcast. 2020, 66, 534–544. [CrossRef]
20.   Udtewar, S.; Dsouza, D.; Aghamkar, A. Visible Light Information System for Museums. Int. J. Sci. Res. Publ. 2019, 9, 2250–3153.
      [CrossRef]
21.   Kim, M.; Suh, T. A Low-Cost Surveillance and Information System for Museum Using Visible Light Communication. IEEE Sens.
      J. 2019, 19, 1533–1541. [CrossRef]
22.   Seminara, M.; Meucci, M.; Tarani, F.; Riminesi, C.; Catani, J. Characterization of a VLC system in real museum scenario using
      diffusive LED lighting of artworks. Photon. Res. 2021, 9, 548–557.
      [CrossRef]
23.   Caputo, S.; Mucchi, L.; Cataliotti, F.; Seminara, M.; Nawaz, T.; Catani, J. Measurement-based VLC channel characterization for
      I2V communications in a real urban scenario. Vehicular Communications 2021, 28, 100305. [CrossRef]
24.   Seminara, M.; Nawaz, T.; Caputo, S.; Mucchi, L.; Catani, J. Characterization of Field of View in Visible Light Communication
      Systems for Intelligent Transportation Systems. IEEE Photonics J. 2020, 12, 1–16. [CrossRef]
J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 45                                                                                          14 of 14




25.   Nawaz, T.; Seminara, M.; Caputo, S.; Mucchi, L.; Catani, J. Low-Latency VLC System with Fresnel Receiver for I2V ITS
      Applications. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2020, 9. [CrossRef]
26.   Nawaz, T.; Seminara, M.; Caputo, S.; Mucchi, L.; Cataliotti, F.S.; Catani, J. IEEE 802.15.7-Compliant Ultra-Low Latency Relaying
      VLC System for Safety-Critical ITS. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2019, 68, 12040–12051. [CrossRef]
27.   Stern, H.; Mahmoud, S.; Stern, L. Communication Systems: Analysis and Design; Pearson Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ,
      USA, 2004. [CrossRef]
28.   Khalili, R.; Salamatian, K. A new analytic approach to evaluation of packet error rate in wireless networks. In Proceedings of
      the 3rd Annual Communication Networks and Services Research Conference (CNSR’05), Halifax, NS, Canada, 16–18 May 2005;
      pp. 333–338. doi:10.1109/CNSR.2005.14.
29.   Hancock, J. Jitter—Understanding it, Measuring It, Eliminating It Part 1: Jitter Fundamentals. High Freq. Electron. Summit Tech.
      Media 2004, 4, 44–50. [CrossRef]
30.   Breed, G. Analyzing Signals Using the Eye Diagram. High Freq. Electron. Summit Tech. Media 2005, 4, 50–53.
31.   Akanegawa, M.; Tanaka, Y.; Nakagawa, M. Basic study on traffic information system using LED traffic lights. IEEE Trans. Intell.
      Transp. Syst. 2001, 2, 197–203. doi:10.1109/6979.969365.
32.   IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks–Part 15.7: Short-Range Optical Wireless Communications. IEEE Std
      802.15.7-2018 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.15.7-2011) 2019, 1–407. [CrossRef]
