Volume 33 (2014), Number 3

Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) 2014
H. Carr, P. Rheingans, and H. Schumann
(Guest Editors)

Visualizing Proximity-Based Spatiotemporal Behavior of
Museum Visitors using Tangram Diagrams
J. Lanir1 P. Bak2 and T. Kuflik1
1 University
2 IBM

of Haifa, Israel
Research, Haifa Lab, Israel

Abstract
For museum curators it is imperative to learn, analyze, and understand the behavior patterns of the visitors in their
museum. Recent developments in the field of indoor positioning systems make the acquisition and availability of
visitor behavior data more attainable. However, the analysis of such data remains a challenge due to its noisiness,
complexity and sheer size. The current paper applies information visualization techniques to analyze this data
and make it more accessible to museum curators and personnel. We first provide a detailed description of the
application domain including an analysis of the curators’ information needs and a description of how a dataset
on visitors’ spatiotemporal behavior could be acquired. In order to address the curators’ needs, we designed a
visualization to encode and convey the information based on a newly adjusted visual glyph that we call Tangram
Diagrams. We thereby focus on the adaptability of the technique to a particular domain, rather than on the novelty
aspects of the technique itself. We have evaluated our design decisions empirically, and conducted an expert study
to describe the insights gained and the value of the information obtained from the visualization. The contribution
of this work is twofold. First, we apply information visualization to the museum domain and discuss how it extends
to general indoor spatiotemporal behavior analysis. Second, we show how a visual glyph metaphor can be applied
in different ways and contexts to efficiently encode multi-faceted information.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): Design Tools and Techniques [D.2.2]: UI—;

1. Motivation
Indoor location sensing systems have become very popular
in recent years. These systems provide automatic tracking
information of objects in various environments. Examples of
applications using such systems are the detection of medical
personnel or equipment in the hospital, detection of products in a warehouse, tracking of crowd movements in various locations and more [LDBL07]. The simplest and most
popular way to provide such information is based on proximity to well-known and predefined positions. A mobile target
is detected by sensors that are placed throughout the environment in known locations. When a stationary sensor detects a mobile target, the target is considered to be located at
that position. Learning about people’s behavior in such environments is a great challenge. Data is episodic rather than
continuous, sensor data may be noisy and unreliable, and
it is difficult to aggregate information and derive insights.
Research in recent years have addressed this problem and
more applications have been made available by industrial
vendors. Even though the collection, storage, and real time
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

monitoring of indoor environments data is progressing, large
improvements are required to analyze such data and draw insights about individual and crowd behavior.

The current paper addresses a particular application domain in which the understanding of indoor behavior is
greatly appreciated – the analysis of museum visitors’ behavior. We apply information visualization to proximitybased spatiotemporal data of museum visitors to aid data
analysis and pattern discovery. We present past works relating to our application and domain problem, and show
that a comprehensive solution is indeed needed. We further demonstrate that visual glyphs can be adjusted to answer a multiplicity of tasks and data sources. Our design
decisions are founded in experimental evaluation and expert interviews, and were thereby iteratively improved and
adjusted. Finally, we raise points for improvements, discuss
shortcomings of our method and suggest further research for
other domains and problem spaces.

2

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

2. Related Work
Analysis of human movement patterns has mostly focused
on the urban and geographic environment using information
taken from GPS and other location based devices. A comprehensive taxonomy of movement data is provided by Dodge
et al. [DWL08]. Andrienko et al. [AAB∗ 11] developed a
conceptual framework for tasks and methods involved in the
analysis of movement, which can be distinguished by the
type of information targeted and by the level of analysis.
Lately, indoor spatial information systems have drawn attention due to the increase use of wireless sensor networks.
The applicability of geographic movement data analysis and
visualization to indoor analysis is not trivial, due to the
different type of data collected and the complexity of the
environment and tasks involved. A newly published book
[AAB∗ 13] provides a comprehensive picture of techniques
and approaches in the field. For example, Space Time Cubes
have been widely investigated in the past to visualize spatial and temporal information simultaneously [Kra03]. However, techniques and methods for continuous movement, can
hardly be applied to multidimensional low resolution sensor
data that only indicate the discrete positioning.
One way to get indoor data in order to learn about indoor human behavior patterns is by using automatic analysis
of video data or motion sensors [IWSK07]. Zhou and colleagues investigate human indoor behavior focusing on the
feature extraction level from videos, also showing the extracted information visually [ZCC∗ 08]. Gong et al. analyze
the actual motion trajectories of indoor visitors as part of a
human semantic behavioral analysis [GNS02]. Finally, Girgensohn et al. also use analysis of video data to examine
traffic flow and patterns of indoor activity in order to provide
a better arrangement and staff-allocation to retail establishments [GSW08]. Analyzing sensor logs for behavior analysis, Growth Ring Maps [BMJK09] assessed spatiotemporal
patterns with the help of dense pixel displays.
Overall, our work contributes to the growing knowledge
in the field of visual analytics of indoor spatiotemporal behavior, by investigating proximity-based sensor information,
showing the details of behavioral patterns such as space,
time and circulation for point-based sensor data. As such,
it provides a novel visual assessment of indoor movement
behavior as a comprehensive application solution.
3. Museum Application Domain
3.1. Analyzing museum visitor behavior
There is a wealth of research analyzing museum visitor behavior stemming from the need of museum practitioners to
improve their exhibits, provide better interpretations, and
better understand the way the audience is experiencing the
exhibits and content provided to them [BDP05]. Various museum researchers have used manual ethnographic observations to examine issues such as visitor circulation [Bit06],
use of signage and labels [McM89], interaction with exhibits
[YB09] and social interaction [LK04]. Manually tracking
and timing visitor behavior using unobtrusive observations,

museum researchers have measured variables such as the total time in an area, total number of stops, proportion of visitors who stop at a specific exhibit, visitor path, time of nonexhibit related behavior and level of engagement with the
exhibit [YB09, Kle93]. Summarizing these variables while
focusing on visitor interaction with exhibits, two measures
are often used in museum studies [BDP05, Ser97]. Together
these variables effectively capture how thoroughly visitors
were engaged with an exhibit:
• Attraction power indicates the relative incidence of people who have stopped in front of an exhibit during their
visit. It is calculated by dividing the number of people
who stop, by the total number of people who have visited
the museum. This measure provides us with an initial idea
of the power of attraction of the exhibit.
• Holding power measures the average time spent in front
of an exhibit. It is calculated by summing up the time a
visitor spent in front of a specific exhibit. This measure
provides us with an initial idea of the power of an exhibit
to hold the interest of a visitor.
Another measure that is of much interest to museum practitioners is visitor circulation. The way visitors go around at
the museum determines what they see, what they focus their
attention on, and ultimately determines what they learn and
affects their overall experience [Bit06]. Thus, curators take
much care in investigating the different paths available at
their museum.
Lately, automatic tracking and positioning technologies
make it easier to gather large quantities of data on the way
visitors behave and interact. Zancanaro et al. [ZKB∗ 07] used
automatically generated logs of visitor positioning to categorize visitor behavior. Lanir et al. [LKD∗ 13] found differences between the behavior of visitors who used a mobile guide in their visit with those who did. Kanda et al.,
[KSP∗ 07] used spatial clustering to show visiting patterns
and estimate visitor trajectories. While these studies examined specific aspects of the visit behavior, there is no research that we are aware of that used automatic tracking for
an open-ended visual analysis of museum visitor behavior.
3.2. Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
Data was recorded of visitors visiting the Hecht museum, a
medium-sized established archaeological museum located at
the University of Haifa campus. Visitors of the museum are
offered a mobile guide system developed as part of the PIL
project [KSZ∗ 11]. The mobile museum guide allows visitors to move freely around the exhibitions while the system
identifies their location and accordingly provides the visitor with relevant information. When a visitor arrives at a
point of interest, marked by a sticker, he or she is automatically prompted with a list of questions related to the exhibit. Once the visitor selects a question of interest, a oneminute multimedia presentation is played, providing an answer to that question (see [LKD∗ 13] for more information).
In order to identify the visitor’s location, the museum was
equipped with a Radio Frequency (RF) based positioning
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

system based on a wireless sensor network (WSN). Forty
five fixed RF tags (Beacons) were statically located at entrances and exits, as well as near relevant locations of interest in the museum, while small mobile wearable RF tags
(Blinds) are worn by visitors. When a Blind is in proximity of a Beacon (determining position) that Blind reports this
information to the server. Blinds transmit information to the
server twice every second. While providing a reasonable indoor positioning solution, the system’s major weakness is
that it only knows when a person is in proximity to a Beacon, not being able to detect positioning in transition from
one Beacon to another. Thus, the system privides sporadic
rather than continous movement data.
Log data of two corpora were gathered for analysis. The
first corpus included data of 423 visitors (194 females) using
the mobile guide during their visit. Participants were regular
museum visitors who were offered a free use of the mobile
guide. Average age of visitors was 43.2 years (SD = 18.4).
The second corpus included data of 144 visitors (79 female)
who did not use the guide during the visit. These visitors
were asked to wear a Blind (to enable us to track their behavior), and visit the museum as they wished. Average age
of this group was 43.4 (SD = 19.5).
Positioning messages from visitors’ Blinds were saved in
a database and later preprocessed and cleaned. In RFIDbased systems, information is often missing or unreliable.
However, it is possible to use the high correlation between
messages both in time and space to clean the data through
spatial and temporal aggregation [JAF∗ 06]. In our case, we
temporarily aggregated reading of the Blind data by running
a sliding window average on the data stream, defining a visitor as detected in a certain poairion only when a certain
amount of messages were above a threshold A. Similarly,
a user was defined as leaving a position when the number
of messages that were not in that position (empty or another
position) were below a predefined threshold B. Obviously, A
is bigger than B and both depend on the value of the size of
the sliding window. The values of the thresholds were determined according to experimentations. This provided us with
a list of time intervals of locations for each visitor starting
from the beginning of the visit.
4. Tangram Diagrams
We followed Munzner’s nested model for visualization design [Mun09] in which we first characterized the problem
domain, abstracted the data types, and then designed the specific encodings for each problem type. In this section, we
describe the abstraction and metaphor we chose for our application and visual mapping of relevant attributes, including an empirical experiment conducted to address design
decisions. From an application perspective, it is beneficial
to use similar visual metaphors in order to reduce learning
time and increase familiarity with the visualization. As our
approach is application driven, we have applied the data attributes to our visualization properties based on the information requirement of the users’ tasks. In the following secsubmitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

3

Figure 1: Design space of a Tangram Diagram.
tions, we analyze the specific user requirements and show
how we adjusted the metaphor to address each information
need of the application area.
4.1. Tangram Diagram Visualization Properties
The metaphor is made out of simple geometric of shape,
which can be triangular, rectangular or circular. We have
selected the triangular shape for our purposes, for the simple reason that its pointy nature makes it slightly more intuitive to express direction orientation and flow. The geometric shape resembles a Tangram game, leading us to the name
Tangram Diagram, as schematically shown in Figure 1.
The diagram consists of several distinct features: the color
of the triangle, orientation, ratio of inner and outer triangles,
and its size. In addition, the two planes can be used for further encoding. Color can be mapped to different types of attributes such as sequential, or categorical, as suggested by
ColorBrewer [HB03]. Throughout the work we have used
colors in the suggested systematic manner. Orientation can
be exploited to express physical direction. Size can be associated with any continuous sequential attribute, which can be
mapped to the area of the triangle. Important here are Tufte’s
comments that area ratio should reflect the data ratio, in order to avoid perceptual biases [TGM83, BKC∗ 13]. Finally
the ratio of the inner and outer triangles can be mapped to
any cumulative or relative value. Furthermore, as can be seen
in Figure 1, two planes could be positioned one against each
other on its diagonals enabling easy comparison of the two
shapes. The major advantage of Tangram diagram is in its
ability to represent ratio information, as a function of tradeoff between two independent, though related properties.
After experimenting with several designs of Tangram diagrams to encode various types of data, we experienced some
confusion and inability of users to accurately judge the ratio between the inner and outer triangles. It is suggested
to use area to encode size of the geometry for comparison [TGM83]. However, people perceive differences in lines
better than areas [CM84]. In our case the triangles overlap,
and share a part of their hypotenuse. We therefore hypothesized that people’s perception of the ratio between the tri-

4

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

(a) Area

(b) Side

(c) Average

Figure 2: Visual encoding of the ratio between inner and
outer triangles - area, side, and their average (60% for all).
angles might depend more on the 1D comparison of the hypotenuse of the triangle than on the 2D area comparison.
4.2. Experiment
To inform our design of how to map a ratio variable to the ratio between triangles of the Tangram diagram, we conducted
an empirical experiment. The users’ task can be phrased as:
what is the relative value of the inner triangle in comparison to the outer triangle? We considered two options for
encoding the ratio: (1) the Area S of the triangles; (2) the
hypotenuse (or Side) of the triangle. Because there was a
substantial difference between the two representations, we
decided to encode a third ratio: (3) Average, which is calculated by the average value of 1 and 2. For the experiment,
we produced images for these three different ratio-encoding
types (Figure 2), with four levels of ratio values resulting in
12 combinations.
We employed a 3 (type) x 4 (ratio) between-subject design
to compare the perception of people of the Tangram glyphs.
The two independent variable were: type which included the
three aforementioned ratio-encoding types: Area, Side, and
Average, and ratio which included four levels of ratio: 20,
40, 60 and 80%. 14 participants (8 male) took part in the experiment. Participants were mostly students at a local university. Participants were randomaly shown all 12 glyphs
(printed on paper) one at a time, and were asked for each
of them to estimate the ratio (in percentage number from 0
to 100) of the inner and outer triangles.
For analysis, we compared the absolute value of the difference between each estimation and its corresponding ratio value as a measurement of the difference between the
perceived and actual ratio value. We conducted a 2-way repeated measure ANOVA on these results to compare between the types. Results indicate that Average had the least
difference between the perceived and actual ratio value (M =
8.05, SD = .79) followed by Side (M = 11.8, SD = .76) and
Area (M = 16.4, SD = 1.4). These differences were significant, F(2, 13) = 15.1, p < .001. Post-hoc analysis using the
Bonferroni adjustment indicated that all pair comparisons
were significant.
Because the Tangram diagram also includes triangles on
different planes (see Figure 1), we repeated the experiment
this time with the two triangles opposite each other (yet still

sharing the hypotenuse). We recruited 14 different participants (4 male), and used the same procedure and analysis. Results indicate that in this case as well, Average had
the least difference between the perceived and actual ratio
value (M = 8.92, SD = .98), with Side (M = 14.3, SD = .62)
and Area (M = 14.8, SD = 1.5) following. These differences
were significant, F(2, 13) = 9.84, p < .001. Post-hoc analysis indicated that Average was better than Area and Side. No
significant difference between Area and Side was found.
Our conclusion from this experiment is that out of the
three examined methods, the average method type best reflected the perceived and actual ratio of the two triangles.
Therefore we used the Average method type in the rest of
our visualizations.
5. Applying Visualization to Museum Visiting Patterns
We applied a user-centered design (UCD) process in the design and implementation of our solution. We began by conducting extended interviews with various museum personnel
in a number of museums in order to better understand the
museum domain and the information needs of the museum
personnel. Interviewees were conducted with the museum
director and five other curator and personnel from the Hecht
museum (on which data we applied our visualizations). We
also interviewed curators from two other major museums.
Finally, we interviewed the CEO of a leading provider of
museum mobile guide solutions with clients in many museums worldwide. Interviews were recorded and then later
analyzed. After the initial interviews, we iterated on our design ideas with the museum personnel, receiving feedback
throughout the design process until we reached our final designs. Finally, we evaluated our final design with all the people from the initial requirement interviews.
During our initial interviews, the following task areas of
visitor behavior analysis have been uncovered:
1. General engagement of the visitors at the exhibit and
room level. All interviewees agreed that one of the most
important tasks is to understand general visitor engagement patterns including holding and attracting power.
2. Circulation and general movement patterns of visitors between rooms. Especially in museums with various movement options, curators were interested to learn what paths
visitors took.
3. Temporal analysis of individuals and small groups. Curators were interested in analyzing individual visits, examining the order of exhibits visited, time spent in each
exhibit, and small group patterns.
In the following subsections we describe each of the three
areas, listing the information requirements, the design of the
visualization, and the implementation on the museum data
for each area.
5.1. Visiting Engagement
As described in Section 3.1, visitor engagement is often
measured as the trade-off between holding and attracting
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Tangram Diagram showing visiting engagement
with schematic patterns.
power, which are two independent variables contributing together to the concept of engagement. Hence, we summarized
the following information requirements: (1 )What is the engagement of visitors by exhibit and how do different exhibits
relate to each other? (2) How does the usage of the mobile
guide affect the engagement of the visitors at every exhibit?
(3) What are the different engagement patterns of exhibits
expressed by the differences of holding-to-attraction ratio?
Consequently, the following attributes of the engagement
needed to be addressed: the holding and attraction power of
each exhibit as well as the relation between holding and attracting power, together with each exhibit’s physical location, and whether a visitor used a mobile guide during the
visit.
Design: Figure 3 shows a schematic image of the representation of one location. We suggest to use color to first
encode the difference between visitors having or not having
a guide by differences in color hue, and second to encode the
differences between holding power and attraction power of
a location by color intensity; the holding power is encoded
by the size of the outer triangle, while the attraction power
(which is a ratio) is encoded by the relative size of the inner triangle. Since the usage of guides is a binary variable,
it can be encoded by the two sides of the planes (similar
to [OHR∗ 09]). Schematic results of such a glyph representation could reveal a large number of possible patterns. Figure 3 demonstrates the expressive power of the Tangram diagram. The first pattern, Figure 3(a), shows a prevailing location - a location with high holding power and medium to
high attracting power. This is probably a popular and busy
exhibit, since many of the visitors go there and stay for a
long period of time. The second pattern, Figure 3(b), is described as a must-have-seen location. It shows medium to
high holding power and maximum attracting power. This is
probably a major exhibit where everyone who visits the museum must go. Finally, the third pattern shown in Figure 3(c),
is described as a specialists exhibit. This is an exhibit which
attracts very few people, probably only ones with special interest, and holds them for a long period of time.
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

5

Implementation: We employed this representation on the
museum visitor data and positioned each Tangram glyph at
the given location of the corresponding exhibit on the museum map. Results shown in Figure 4, present general visitor engagement at the various museum exhibits. Results reveal several interesting points. First, we can easily see several exhibits with high holding power. Not surprisingly, two
of these are in the main attraction area of the museum - a
2000 year old ship extracted from the sea bottom and then
reconstructed (annotated e and f in Figure 4). It is also clear
that visitors spent much time at the first few exhibits (a, b,
c which are located at the museum entrance hall) with visitor’s attention span quickly getting shorter. Second, we notice several exhibits with a high attracting power. Most people stop and look at the first exhibit (a), as well as the next
exhibits at the entrance hall (b and c). Other high attraction
points are point (d) which is the major junction of the museum, and (e) which is the main point to observe the ancient
ship. The high attracting power at point (e) reflects the fact
that most visitors arriving at the museum indeed go and see
its prominent attraction. On the other hand, it seems that very
few visitors go up to the second floor (g), with most exhibits
on the second floor showing a very low attraction power.
Third, it is easy to see the effect that the mobile guide had
on visitor engagement. In most locations, the holding power
is larger for visitors who used the mobile guide compared to
those who did not use the guide.
5.2. Visiting Circulation
Understanding visiting circulation in indoor environments is
a critical and fundamental task of curators, organizers, and
rescue or security personnel. The following information requirements were summarized from our requirement elicitations: (1) Describe the back-and-forth transitions between
rooms in terms of number of visitors and the overall visitor
circulation behavior. (2) Distinguish between overall transitions and the transition behavior of visitors the first time they
leave a room.
To efficiently and accurately conduct these tasks, we
aggregated the amount of visitors transiting between two
rooms, separating between overall transitions and first-time
transitions. Overall transitions are the total number of transitions from one room to another, while first-time transitions
describe the first time visitors made any transitions leaving
from a parcicular room. This was of interest for the curators,
because they wanted to see where visitors first go to after
being in a certain location.
Design: A schematic demonstration of the visual encoding is shown in Figure 5. We have used color hue to encode
the difference between first-time and non-first time transitions. We separated the glyph along the diagonal to show direction of movement as pointing triangles. Finally, we have
mapped the amount of visitors of a transition to the size of
the triangles. Using the Tangram diagram for representing
circulation patterns can reveal a lot of interesting information about the directional changes, visitor flows and first-

6

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

Figure 4: Engagement at different locations is shown on a Tangram Diagram. Engagement is expressed by the holding power
(low-intensity triangles) and the relative value of attracting power (high-intensity triangles). Hue is mapped on the usage of
guides (using is blue, and not using is orange).

time visiting behavior. Figure 5(a) shows more visitors going
from right to left, but equal flows between the two locations
for first-time visitors. This indicates equal corossing over on
first-time, yet a clear preference left when returning to the
right side. Figure 5(b) shows a clear preference of all visitors
to one direction, with no visitors going in the opposite direction. This migh indicate a designed obstacle or pathway for
those coming from one direction. Finally, the third pattern
Figure 5(c), shows a clear distinction in transition directions
for first-time and returning visitors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5: Tangram Diagram showing visiting circulation
with schematic patterns.

Implementation: Figure 6 presents general visitor circulation applied to visitor data at the museum. Each main museum room is depicited on the map using a number. It is
clear that the first Tangram glyph located between room 1
(entrance hall) and room 2 (main junction) is bigger than the
other Tangram glyphs in the diagram. This is because it includes all museum visitors rather than a subset of visitors.
Because this is the only place to enter and leave the museum, all visitors have to pass between rooms 1 and 2. For
the same reason, the two directions are equal: any person
entering the museum also has to leave it. The direction of
first-time visitors is clearly shown in the Tangram glyph going from room 1 to room 2. A similar pattern can be seen in
the Tangram glyph connecting between location 2 and room
9, since room 9 is on the second floor and the only way to
reach it is through location 2.
Location 2 is the main junction of the museum that visitors arrive after they pass through the entrance hall. It is
interesting to view the circulation from and to this point as
described later in the evaluation section. It is also interesting to note the path of visitors arriving to room 6. Passing
through the door near the main junction, visitors can go left
to room 7, or right to room 6. We see that most visitors go
first to room 7 and only then go to room 6. This can be explained either by the fact that room 7 is visually appealing
causing visitors to go there, or by assuming that visitors are
being methodological and trying to cover the entire part of
the museum. Finally, looking at the paths to room 8, which
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

7

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

holds the main attraction of the museum, we see two major
paths: 1-2-7-6-8 and 1-2-3-4-5-8. These two paths can form
a circle (1-2-7-6-8-5-4-3-2-1). It seems that many visitors
follow this circle in either direction. This is supported by the
high first-time values seen going away from room 8 (from 8
to 5 and from 8 to 6).
(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Tangram Diagram for temporal analysis and
schematic patterns. (b) two consecutive exhibits with same
durations with low guide usage
Figure 6: Visitor circulation between rooms are shown using
Tangram Diagrams. Differences between first time visitors
and directional differences are clearly shown by the different
glyphs.

5.3. Individual and small group temporal analysis
The temporal investigation of a single visitor’s behavior is
essential in understanding what happens in the museum. Furthermore, people often come to the museum in small groups
mainly with family and friends. The visiting experience is
largely affected by people’s social interaction, shared experience and joined interests [FD92]. Thus, following the
interviews, we defined the following list to summarize the
tasks for the temporal investigation: (1) Understand individual temporal visiting behavior in terms of location sequence
and time spent at locations. (2) Understand group dynamics in terms of joint and disjoint attendance at exhibits and
rooms. (3) Understand the effect of mobile guide usage on
individual and group visit patterns.
Design: We adjusted the Tangram diagrams to cope with
these new tasks. The information requested by the curators
should reveal the timeline of the visit including duration
spent at the level of both exhibits and rooms. Thus, a visit
to an exhibit was encoded by a Tangram glyph (see Figure 7) and we chose to position the Tangrams on a vertical
time-axis in a parallel manner for each individual separately
to allow comparison of individual behavior between group
members. For each glyph, The outer rectangle was mapped
to the overall duration at the particular exhibit such that the
length of the rectangle corresponds to the duration, whereas
the width of the rectangle is fixed to a constant pixel length.
This mapping provides a linear relation between temporal
duration and the height of the rectangle. The time using a
guide in a certain exhibit is mapped relative to the overall
duration at that exhibit using color intensity (pale vs. intensive color of the same hue), similar to the way we encoded
relative information in the previous sections. The opposite
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

inner triangle can be mapped to any sequential variable. In
our case, we did not need any more mappings so our results
only show innter rectangles. Finally, the number of exhibits
exceeds the number of distinguishable colors, and therefore
this information can only be annotated in textual form as
a label. However, rooms (to which exhibits belong to) are
mapped to a qualitative color palette.
The above encoding is schematically represented in Figure 7. Possible patterns are shown on the right side of the
image. Pattern (a) represents two consecutive exhibits with
different duration and relative long usage of guides. Pattern
(b) represents equal visiting duration of two exhibits with
limited guide usage in both.
Implementation: Figure 8 presents the implementation
of this schema for four groups of visitors: one single visitor
(labeled 1 in the figure), two pairs (2 and 3) and a group of
three visitors arriving together (4). There are many insights
that can be produced from this visualization. Looking at an
individual visitor, for example visitor 1, it is easy to see the
temporal patterns of the visit including sequence of rooms,
time spent at various rooms, and the fact that the visitor did
not return to any rooms during the visit. It is also clear that
the mobile guide was heavily used during this current visit.
In terms of group dynamics, we can see that groups 3 and 4,
mostly kept together being at the same rooms during the entire visit. Group 2 on the other hand, parted at the beginning
of their visit, just after the first room, returning together only
at the end of the visit. Looking more closely at group 3 we
see a very interesting group dynamic. We can see that there
is a clear leading pattern of visitor B. We see that visitor 3A
and visitor 3B moved together through the museum rooms,
however, visitor 3B entered each room (other than the ancient ship - depicted in pink) slightly earlier than 3A. This
suggests that 3B lead the visit with 3A following along. Finally, we can learn many things looking at guide usage. We
can see that visitor 1 used the guide a lot and everywhere.
Looking at group 3, we see that mostly 3A used the guide

8

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

during the visit, while 3B only used it at the beginning, probably trying it once and then deciding not to use it. We see the
same pattern with visitor 2B using the guide at the start of the
visit and then getting tired of it. This pattern might be part
of what museum practitioners call museum fatigue which refer to the mental exhaustion and decreased attention across
successive exhibit viewing [Bit09].

Figure 8: Individual and Group Temporal Analysis using
Tangram Diagrams. Patterns of dynamic behavior at different exhibits are shown by the glyphs and temporal flow. Colors encode different areas in the museum.

6. Evaluation
We performed an expert evaluation to examine the usefulness and effectiveness of our visualizations. Since our claim
is on creating a comprehensive domain specific solution
rather than outperforming specific alternative solutions in a
particular aspect of the problem space, we chose to evaluate
our work by empirical studies to assess the visual attributes

of the proposed Tangram Diagrams (Section 4.2), and in addition to conduct an expert evaluation with our target users.
Finally, we reflect on our design decisions and discuss advantages and disadvantages (Section 7).
We presented the three visualizations to the museum personnel who took part in our initial extended interviews. For
each figure, the details of the visualization were first explained using the schematic images. Each participant was
then asked to comment on the visualization and explain what
insights (if any) can be drawn from it. Finally, for each visualization, participants were asked to comment on how easy
it is to understand, how interesting is the data gained from it,
how much insight it provided and on its general effectiveness
for the tasks at hand.
In general, participants were enthusiastic about being able
to visually explore the behavior of visitors in their museum, and commented that this provided them with information and insights that were highly interesting and valuable
and previously not available. The museum director generally
commented that these are great tools for her to both substantiate hypotheses she has and to gain new insights and ideas
about how visitors behave in the museum. A few participants
commented on the lack of information for locations that did
not have sensors near them. In addition, a few participants
commented that it would have been interesting to add demographic distributions according to age, gender and other
parameters to these visualizations. Nevertheless, all participants pointed out that the visualizations provided them with
new understandings and insights of the way visitors experience the museum, and a few asked to be given the visualization to show to their peers.
Regarding visiting engagement (Figure 4), most participants were quickly able to understand the visualization after the initial explanation. For two participants, it took more
time to understand how the attracting power was depicted.
All participants were surprised to see how and to which extent the use of the mobile guide increased the holding power
compared to visitors not using the electronic guide. Another
clear insight that was commented by all participants is the
low attraction power in the second floor (marked by "g" in
Figure 4). This actually sparked a long conversation at the
museum office about why people do not go up to the second
floor and what can be done about it. The museum director
commented: "I learn from this that unfortunately, most visitors miss one of the biggest and most interesting collections
in the world of ancient stamps. We have to find ways to direct
visitors to the second floor to view this exquisite collection".
Other comments mostly had to do with insights concerning
specific exhibits.
Regarding visiting circulation (Figure 6), the visualization
seemed to be less intuitive and was a bit more difficult to
learn. Nevertheless, after a few explanations all participants
managed to understand all the mappings. The museum director has told us that in their museum, they took the approach
of large open spaces with no intended directional guidance
within or between them, so the visitor is encouraged to freely
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

9

wander around the museum exhibitions. Thus, the museum
head was very interested in seeing which paths the visitors
took. She told us, that the left wing (rooms 6, 7 and 8) is
newer and more visually attractive, and she was wondering
whether people go there first, and whether many people still
go to the old wing (rooms 3 and 4). She was very pleased to
find out from the visualization that from the main museum
junction (point 2), there is a more or less equal distribution
of people between the two museum wings. Generally speaking, participants commented that the visualization gave them
a nice view of the flow of visitors from one room to another,
and the ability to understand the direction and amount of
visitor flow. Some participants showed interest in seeing the
same diagram on a sensor level. That is, for a single room, to
be able to view the circulation of visitors between exhibits.
Finally, we presented several individual temporal visualizations to participants (such as in Figure 8, and more).
The visualizations shown to participants were augmented
with exhibit name labels for exhibits with long duration (not
shown in the figure). All participants were able to easily understand the visualizations. This might be because of their
previous familiarity with timelines or with the fact that they
got accustomed to the Tangram metaphor. Participants really
enjoyed looking at these representations, and were very interested in finding specific patters of visitor behaviors. For
example, they looked at a specific path and speculated why
a visitor might go from one exhibit to another and then from
one room to another. Participants were also interested in
looking into group behavior patterns and in guide usage patterns. They commented that this visualization was the most
interesting one to explore as it provided varied behavioral
data. As one participant commented: "While the other images only showed general visitor patterns, here I can examine things on an individual level". All participants expressed
the wish to receive more such visualizations of all visitors.

ception was influenced by both the 2D (area) and 1D (line)
comparisons. Still, we believe that a more thorough examination of the perception of overlapping shapes need to be
addressed empirically. There are other visual attributes as
well, that need to be discussed for a comprehensive problem
space; length or even textual or digital information presentation. These have not been fully considered in our approach
and need to be addressed in future work.
We used an adaptation of the same glyph for consistency
over all our solutions. By using the same metaphor for a
multiplicity of tasks we hoped to accommodate users’ cognitive metaphoric capacity for learning and remembering, as
discussed by Maquire et al [MRSS∗ 12]. Nevertheless, we
believe that under other conditions, this requirement can be
relaxed, and better results might be achieved when applied
to other application fields. Our goal was to provide a comprehensive application solution. Thus, a comparison of the
suggested visual design to other techniques was not in scope
of the current paper, but should be addressed and empirically
evaluated in future research.
There are several limitations to the Tangram glyphs. The
major weakness of the glyphs are that they are not immediately obvious to interpret and thus there might be a learning
curve when using them. In our evaluation, we observed that
it took some time for the curators to understand the encoding and make use of the visualizations. However, all participtants were eventually able to comprehend their meaning and produce insights. Another limitation of the glyphs is
that they are not scalable. While being able to encode multidimensional data, the number of variables that can be encoded is limited. Regarding the positioning of the glyphs on
the map, an interactive solution can address possible visual
clutter using filtering and semantic zooming.

7. Reflections on Design Decisions
Cleveland and McGill [CM84] defined and ordered several
elementary perceptual tasks used to extract quantitative information. They showed that judging areas is less accurate
than judging length. Other studies have also shown that area
may not be the best choice for representing numbers for
comparisons. People’s relative judgment of areas is usually
proportional not to the actual physical size of the areas, but
rather to the area to a power less than one (typically around
0.8 for circles or squares [CHM82]). This stands in contrast to the perception of lines which is approximately linear [Teg65, Spe04] Furthermore, in area (or size), the accuracy of judgment is limited as it is not an associative variable,
and the layout, shape, orientation and position of objects to
be compared might influence viewers’ ability of judgment
[Ber83, BKC∗ 13]. In our case, it was important to judge the
ratio between two triangles overlapping on their hypotenuse.
We thus used an empirical evaluation to decide how this ratio is perceived and how it should be encoded. The results of
our user study showed that in this specific case, user’s per-

8. Conclusions
The current paper addresses the museum visitor application
domain. We show how information visualization techniques
can be applied to data on museum visitors, revealing behavioral patterns of interest to museum curators. Our major contribution is in the analysis of this particular application field;
we have evaluated and formalized the task requirements by
the curators, conducted a visualization design and applied
it efficiently to create a solution. A secondary contribution
of this work is in showing the multi-faceted exploitation of
a visual metaphor to a number of application specific tasks
and information types.
We believe that such problems on a practical level exist in
other indoor domains, such as resource allocation in harbors
and airports, malls and hospitals. For example, hospital room
occupancy rate versus time spent in the hospital could be
addressed directly with our approach. Future research will
need to explore the domain independence of the method by
abstracting the tasks and problems solved and assesssing its
advantages and disadvantages with a general purpose tool.

submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

10

Lanir, J. / Tangram Diagrams

References
[AAB∗ 11] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N., BAK P., K EIM D.,
K ISILEVICH S., W ROBEL S.: A conceptual framework and taxonomy of techniques for analyzing movement. Journal of Visual
Languages and Computing 22, 3 (2011), 213–232. 2
[AAB∗ 13] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N., BAK P., K EIM D.,
W ROBEL S.: Visual analytics of movement. Springer, 2013. 2
[BDP05] B OLLO A., DAL P OZZOLO L.: Analysis of visitor behaviour inside the museum: An empirical study. In Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Arts and Cultural Management, Montreal (2005). 2
[Ber83] B ERTIN J.: Semiology of graphics: diagrams, networks,
maps. 9

[Kra03] K RAAK M.-J.: The space-time cube revisited from a
geovisualization perspective. In Proc. 21st International Cartographic Conference (2003), pp. 1988–1996. 2
[KSP∗ 07] K ANDA T., S HIOMI M., P ERRIN L., N OMURA T.,
I SHIGURO H., H AGITA N.: Analysis of people trajectories with
ubiquitous sensors in a science museum. In Robotics and Automation, 2007 IEEE International Conference on (2007), IEEE,
pp. 4846–4853. 2
[KSZ∗ 11] K UFLIK T., S TOCK O., Z ANCANARO M.,
G ORFINKEL A., J BARA S., K ATS S., S HEIDIN J., K ASH TAN N.: A visitor’s guide in an active museum: Presentations,
communications, and reflection. Journal on Computing and
Cultural Heritage (JOCCH) 3, 3 (2011), 11. 2

[Bit06] B ITGOOD S.: An analysis of visitor circulation: Movement patterns and the general value principle. Curator: The Museum Journal 49, 4 (2006), 463–475. 2

[LDBL07] L IU H., DARABI H., BANERJEE P., L IU J.: Survey of
wireless indoor positioning techniques and systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications
and Reviews 37, 6 (2007), 1067–1080. 1

[Bit09] B ITGOOD S.: Museum fatigue: A critical review. Visitor
Studies 12, 2 (2009), 93–111. 8

[LK04] L EINHARDT G., K NUTSON K.: Listening in on museum
conversations. Altamira Press, 2004. 2

[BKC∗ 13] B ORGO R., K EHRER J., C HUNG D., M AGUIRE E.,
L ARAMEE R., H AUSER H., WARD M., C HEN M.: Glyph-based
visualization: Foundations, design guidelines, techniques and applications. 3, 9

[LKD∗ 13] L ANIR J., K UFLIK T., D IM E., W ECKER A. J.,
S TOCK O.: The influence of a location-aware mobile guide on
museum visitors’ behavior. Interacting with Computers (2013).
2

[BMJK09] BAK P., M ANSMANN F., JANETZKO H., K EIM
D. A.: Spatiotemporal Analysis of Sensor Logs using Growth
Ring Maps. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics (TVCG) 15, 6 (2009), 913–920. 2
[CHM82] C LEVELAND W. S., H ARRIS C. S., M C G ILL R.:
Judgments of circle sizes on statistical maps. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 77, 379 (1982), 541–547. 9
[CM84] C LEVELAND W. S., M C G ILL R.: Graphical perception:
Theory, experimentation, and application to the development of
graphical methods. Journal of the American Statistical Association 79, 387 (1984), 531–554. 3, 9
[DWL08] D ODGE S., W EIBEL R., L AUTENSCHÜTZ A.: Towards a taxonomy of movement patterns. Information visualization 7, 3-4 (2008), 240. 2
[FD92] FALK J. J. H., D IERKING L. D.: The museum experience. Howells House, 1992. 7
[GNS02] G ONG S., N G J., S HERRAH J.: On the semantics of
visual behaviour, structured events and trajectories of human action. Image and Vision Computing 20, 12 (2002), 873 – 888. 2
[GSW08] G IRGENSOHN A., S HIPMAN F., W ILCOX L.: Determining activity patterns in retail spaces through video analysis. In
Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on Multimedia (2008), ACM, pp. 889–892. 2

[McM89] M C M ANUS P. M.: Oh, yes, they do: How museum
visitors read labels and interact with exhibit texts. Curator: The
Museum Journal 32, 3 (1989), 174–189. 2
[MRSS∗ 12] M AGUIRE E., ROCCA -S ERRA P., S ANSONE S.-A.,
DAVIES J., C HEN M.: Taxonomy-based glyph design - with a
case study on visualizing workflows of biological experiments.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18,
12 (2012), 2603–2612. 9
[Mun09] M UNZNER T.: A nested model for visualization design and validation. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on 15, 6 (2009), 921–928. 3
[OHR∗ 09] O ELKE D., H AO M., ROHRDANTZ C., K EIM D. A.,
DAYAL U., H AUG L.-E., JANETZKO H.: Visual opinion analysis
of customer feedback data. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2009. VAST 2009. IEEE Symposium on (2009), IEEE,
pp. 187–194. 5
[Ser97] S ERRELL B.: Paying attention: The duration and allocation of visitors’ time in museum exhibitions. Curator 40 (1997),
108–125. 2
[Spe04] S PENCE I.: The apparent and effective dimensionality of
representations of objects. Human Factors: The Journal of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 46, 4 (2004), 738–747.
9
[Teg65] T EGHTSOONIAN M.: The judgment of size. The American journal of psychology (1965), 392–402. 9

[HB03] H ARROWER M., B REWER C.: Colorbrewer. org: an online tool for selecting colour schemes for maps. Cartographic
Journal, The 40, 1 (2003), 27–37. 3

[TGM83] T UFTE E. R., G RAVES -M ORRIS P.: The visual display
of quantitative information, vol. 31. Graphics press Cheshire, CT,
1983. 3

[IWSK07] I VANOV Y. A., W REN C. R., S OROKIN A., K AUR I.:
Visualizing the history of living spaces. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1153–1160.
2

[YB09] YALOWITZ S. S., B RONNENKANT K.: Timing and
tracking: Unlocking visitor behavior. Visitor Studies 12, 1 (2009),
47–64. 2

[JAF∗ 06] J EFFERY S. R., A LONSO G., F RANKLIN M. J., H ONG
W., W IDOM J.: A pipelined framework for online cleaning of
sensor data streams. In Data Engineering, 2006. ICDE’06. Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on (2006), IEEE,
pp. 140–140. 3
[Kle93] K LEIN H.-J.: Tracking visitor circulation in museum settings. Environment and Behavior 25, 6 (1993), 782–800. 2

[ZCC∗ 08] Z HOU Z., C HEN X., C HUNG Y.-C., H E Z., H AN
T. X., K ELLER J. M.: Activity analysis, summarization, and visualization for indoor human activity monitoring. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 18, 11 (2008),
1489–1498. 2
[ZKB∗ 07] Z ANCANARO M., K UFLIK T., B OGER Z., G OREN BAR D., G OLDWASSER D.: Analyzing museum visitors’ behavior patterns. User Modeling 2007 (2007), 238–246. 2
submitted to Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) (2014)

