XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece

3D SURVEY TECHNOLOGIES FOR RECONSTRUCTION, ANALYSIS AND DIAGNOSIS
IN THE CONSERVATION PROCESS OF CULTURAL HERITAGE
P. Saloniaa, V. Belluccia, S. Scolasticoa, A. Marcolongoa, T. Leti Messina a
a

CNR, Istituto per le Tecnologie Applicate ai Beni Culturali, Rome Research Area
Via Salaria, km 29.300, 00016 Monterotondo St. (Rome) ITALY - paolo.salonia@itabc.cnr.it
KEY WORDS: Surveying, Photogrammetry, Laser scanning, Modelling¸ Reconstruction, Cultural Heritage, Archaeology.
ABSTRACT:
The recent survey technologies, play a leading role in the process of knowledge of the cultural heritage.
In fact they are finalized to the acquisition of geometric data necessary to describe usefully geometric features and peculiarities of
historical monuments necessary for their conservation and safeguard.
Besides digitalisation of the acquired data, allows the same data availability by different typologies of users in order to spread and
share knowledge for cultural heritage valorisation.
Quick stereo-photogrammetric systems and laser scanner technology have advantages but also limits referring to the elaboration,
management and possibilities of use.
The recent development of digital stereo-photogrammetric systems allows the definition of 3d visualization and navigation
environments within which the data referring to geometric consistency is combined, without loss of rigour, with other qualitative,
morphological and colour information specific to the photographic document.
The laser scanner technology likewise permits a detailed three-dimensional description of the artefacts geometry, without subjective
interpretation from the operators. Therefore laser scanner opens up extremely interesting horizons to possible geometry analyses or to
evaluations of monuments state of conservation and static conditions.
The necessity to compare these different survey technologies becomes fundamental to verify the accuracy of acquired numeric data,
to evaluate their possible integration and to define different protocols of use in relation to the artefacts morphological-architectural
characteristics and to the survey finalities.
The critical aspects of the described topic will be proposed through the analysis of a specific study case: the documentation of the
roman triumphal arch of Augustus in Aosta.
1.

INTRODUCTION

Geometric survey represents the first step in the process of
analysis and diagnosis of architectural monument state of
conservation and it allows to define a geometric basis to
which relate every other further information, deriving from
diversified disciplinary field, so that to achieve an historicalarchitectural integrated knowledge of the monument.
Therefore geometric survey can be considered a fundamental
stage for every programmed activity of cultural heritage
safeguard and damage prevention.
In this frame, the use of modern survey technologies, like
stereoscopic photogrammetric systems and 3D laser scanner
technology, allows to obtain an objective, discrete and
rigorous representation of the artefact, in order to determine a
global documentation (Guarnieri et al., 2004), especially
important in the case of archaeological monuments that have
complex geometry or irregular shape (Salonia et al., 2006).
The present article describes and compares the two different
above-mentioned survey technologies (quick stereoscopic
photogrammetric systems and 3D laser scanner technology),
used for the 3D geometric documentation of the roman
triumphal arch of Augustus in the city of Aosta, within a joint
research project carried out by CNR Institute for Technology
Applied to Cultural Heritage (CNR-ITABC) and the
Superintendence for Cultural and Environmental Heritage of
the Valle d'Aosta.
The Valle d'Aosta Autonomous Region (RAVA) determined
to direct one’s intervention policy, for cultural heritage
conservation, towards preventive programmed maintenance,
based on the constant monitoring of risk situations and the
management of systematic conservation interventions. To this

purpose the Superintendence needed a precise scientific
geometric documentation necessary to help the process of
decay condition and possible static damages diagnosis, and to
precisely refer to the monument geometry all the data
acquired during the monitoring activities and the analyses
relevant to materials alteration and decay.
The necessity of this scientifically reliable documentation,
sufficiently detailed from the point of view of geometry and
colour information, has led to choose a multimodal approach
for the survey activities, based on the experimentation and
the integration of the two different survey technologies, so as
to guarantee the 3D monument representation, both raster and
vectorial, with the best optimization of acquisition and
processing time. Therefore this research project furnished an
important occasion to analyze differences, advantages and
limits of these 3D survey technologies.
1.1 Study case description
The imposing roman triumphal arch of Augustus, build in the
25 a.C., is one of the most important architectural testimony
of the Augustan period in Valle d’Aosta.
The monument is situated in the east edge of Aosta city and
is aligned with the axis between the antique roman bridge,
situated nearby the Buthier course, and the Porta Praetoria,
the east access of the walled town.
The arch of Augustus was build as a tribute to the emperor
Augustus and also to honour and celebrate the military
victory of the roman troop, on whose guide was the second
lieutenant of Augustus, Aulo Terenzio Varrone, over the

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
Salassi tribe that occupied the Valle D’Aosta since the II
century a.C (Corni, 1989).
The honorary arch, with only one fornix, is totally 17.5
metres high and 11.5 metres height, till the circular vault.
The arch, build with pudding-ashlars, is a mixture of Doric
and Corinthian order.

Figure 1. The roman triumphal arch of Augustus in Aosta

In fact the four half columns that adorn the facades and the
three half columns on the sides have Corinthian capitals and
support a Doric trabeation formed by metopes and triglyfs.
The attic (penthouse) was replaced in 1716 with a slate four
pitches roof as a protection from the seepage of water, that, in
1912, was later renewed during consolidation activities.
In 1449 the fourteen century wooden Crucified, named Saint
Voult, was located under the vault of the arch as a votive
offer in order to avoid in that period the frequently
inundations of the torrent Buthier, whose tumultuous water
covered most of the ancient roman traces of Aosta city.
2. METHODOLOGY AND TECHNIQUES USED
The recent technologies used for the survey of the arch of
Augustus in Aosta is a quick non-conventional stereophotogrammetric system and the 3D laser scanner
technology. Both technologies have been supported by the
same topographical acquisition in order to verify the
reliability and the precision of the results obtained, but also to
insert the monument in his environmental landscape.
2.1 Quick stereoscopic photogrammetric system
Concerning the stereophotogrammetric survey, the adopted
system is CyclopII produced by Menci Software.
It consists on a digital calibrated photographic camera
applied to a sleigh bound that flows on a rectilinear special
steel guide mounted on an aluminium bar which is positioned
on a common topographical tripod (Menci, 2000).
For the realization of the stereoscopic pair it is fundamental
to determine the optimal distance from the object and
between the two shots, depending on the characteristics of the
study case, on the precision and the detail to obtain and on
the objective of the camera used.
Considering the use of a single photocamera, the system has
many advantages, as cheapness, accuracy (a single
calibration), constructive homogeneity (same response to
colour and same defectology in general).

Moreover, the system does not require topographical support
in order to obtain single stereoscopic models; the topographic
acquisition is nevertheless necessary for linking different
stereoscopic models and in order to georeference the final
stereoscopic strips.

Figure 2. Scheme of the acquisition with the stereophotogrammetric
system Cyclop II produced by Menci Software

2.2 Laser scanner technology
Concerning the 3D laser scanner survey, a Leica HDS2500
laser scanner (former Cyrax 2500) has been used. It is a time
of flight laser scanner, able to scan objects up to 100 metres
with a single point accuracy of 6 millimetres. The acquisition
distance can be changed from 1.5 to 100 metres, but the
maximum recommended range is 50 metres (Johansson,
2002).
A laptop computer, in which is installed a Cyclone software
of Cyrax Technologies, connected to the system, controls the
scanner functionality.
Cyclone software allows the acquisition, the registration and
the alignment of single points clouds, captured from the
different scanner position, and necessary for the complete
coverage of the different faces of the monument.
A punctual three-dimensional survey, allowed to take the x-yz spatial coordinates of numerous points of the monument
surfaces, whose reciprocal distance can be chosen in relation
to the needed survey precision and detail representation.
3. THE SURVEY ACTIVITIES
The survey activities, necessary for the complete threedimensional documentation of the roman triumphal arch,
provided different specific operating phases for both the
described technologies, photogrammetry and laser scanner.
These phases can be mainly subdivided in data acquisition
and data processing and are deeply described in the following
paragraphs.
They have both presented a great number of operative
difficulties: first the acquisition phase, because of the
monument position in an urbanized landscape that led many
interferences to the survey activities; second the processing
phase, because of the artefact morphological configuration
that made really complex a truthful and detailed geometric
reconstruction, in particular of the decorative elements
without a definite geometry and regular edges, even more
compromised by the biological and chemical-physical decay.

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
3.1. Data acquisition
After the execution of detailed preliminary inspections, data
acquisition has been planned in such a way as to perform at
the same time the stereoscopic coverage and the laser scanner
acquisition of the monument, making use of an unique
common topographic framing.
The stero-photogrammetric survey has involved a working
group composed of three operators: two architects for
acquiring the photographic documentation and for taking
notes of all the data necessary to perform the next processing
phase; a qualified technician for developing support activities
and for operating the temporary elevator used during the
photogrammetric data acquisition. The use of the elevator
was indeed important because of the monument height, in
order to realize a stereo-photogrammetric coverage of the
artefact with a catch axis perfectly orthogonal to the external
façades; besides this possibility of working at different
altitude reduced work interferences due to the urban
monument position.
High-resolution digital images have been captured by the use
of Cyclope II stereo-photogrammetric system, fitted with a
calibrated Nikon D-100 digital camera (CCD sensor of 6.1
mega pixel, 24mm lens used).
The complete stereo-photogrammetric coverage of each front
has been performed, proceeding with the acquisition of
several horizontally and vertically overlapping models with at
least a stereo-pairs side overlap of 30%∗.
Every main front was surveyed with a total number of about
12 models, changing four different photographic station and
adopting, for each of them, four different elevator vertical
position. On the contrary every minor front required a lower
number of models, about 8 models, with the use of only two
different photographic station and four different elevator
vertical position. Finally, for the survey of the internal
triumphal arch surfaces, a great number of models were
realized, about 24 models, in order to provide also the
complete vault documentation; to this end some shots for the
vault stereoscopic coverage have to be realized with a catch
axis inclined towards the top, paying attention to adopt a
rotation angle, respect to the vertical, of not more than 15°, in
order minimize photographic deformations.
In the aggregate 64 stereo-models have been captured in four
working days (corresponding to 32 working hours).
The distance of the shooting stations from the object ranged
between 7 and 8 metres according to the geometry of the
monument and the photogram scale ratio needed.
As regards laser scanner acquisition, the monument position
in the centre of a big square, frequently characterized by
traffic congestion, necessarily required to perform part of the
survey activities during the night hours, so that every external
interferences could be easily avoided.
Therefore, in order to reduce the time necessary for the
equipment moving, the work group was composed by two
operators even if usually only one operator is able to use the
instrumentation and to perform laser scanner acquisition by
himself. The operative activities are indeed minimized: the
expert user has to simply direct the scanner towards the
scene, to define the area of the scene that he wants to scan
and the resolution for scanning on the laptop computer,
connected to the system, and to start the acquisition.
In this case, according to the survey precision and the
representation detail needed, point clouds have been acquired
∗
The quick stereo-photogrammetric system used allows to reduce the
overlapping value between individual stereo-pairs, typical for
conventional stereophotogrammetry, consisting of 55 - 65% overlap.

with a spatial resolution of 1 cm; however some detailed
scans of significant architectural or decorative elements, as
for example the Corinthian capitals, were realized, adopting a
point to point spacing of 6 mm.

Figure 3. Part of the laser scanner acquisition performed
during the night

For the whole laser scanner survey of the monument 19 scans
have been performed in two working days (corresponding to
16 working hours): 12 global scans, acquired from a distance
to the object variable between 20 and 25 metres; 7 particular
scans, acquired from a distance of about 8 metres, in order to
complete the hidden surfaces acquisition of the triumphal
arch footing that, from a distance to the object of about 20-25
metres, have been occluded by the slight slope of the ground.
Both the stero-photogrammetric and the laser scanner surveys
have been supported by topographic survey**.
The acquisition of the space coordinates of significant
support points, performed through the use of a total laser
station, was indeed necessary to carry out all the next
processing phases: either to link different stereoscopic
models together, or to align and globally register single
points clouds or, finally, to produce orthorectified images for
the geometric models texture. To this end particular attention
was devoted in the choice of the topographic points, so that
they would be suited both to photogrammetry and laser
scanner restitution, in order to improve the accuracy of the
results integration and to achieve a better overlap between
geometric and photographic documentation.
The stero-photogrammetric survey made the support point
topographic acquisition particularly onerous, in term of
working times and thus of cost, since for each pair of
photograms a minimum of three known coordinate points,
shared with the preceding stereo-model, must be surveyed in
order to perform the next restitution (a total number of 180
topographic support point were acquired). Only a few of
these topographic support point have been also used for the
generation of the final laser scanner based 3D model.
In order to avoid any possible interference with the surfaces
geometry acquisition, significant natural architectural points
were chosen as support points, instead of using traditional
topographic targets; detailed scan of these points were carried
out during laser scanner acquisition, so as to make easier and
more precise their identification in the final points clouds.
Contextually to this support points topographic acquisition
also the monument planimetric survey has been performed. A
system of local polygonals, linked to the main datum points
of the topographic network of the city, has been created
**

All the necessary topographic survey activities were realized by
Mario Mascellani of ITABC - CNR.

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
during the topographic survey, such as to acquire coordinates
of some ground control points too, necessary for having the
possibility of geo-referencing the final 3D model.
The triumphal arch of Augustus 3D geometric survey, carried
out by the combination of photogrammetry and laser scanner
technologies, has led to make a few useful remarks about
differences, limits and opportunities offered by these two
measurement techniques.
As regards the operative phase of data acquisition the
application of laser scanner technology allows to obtain some
advantages in term of working times and costs since it
requires less human and instrumentals resources than
photogrammetry. A single operator can acquire millions of
points x-y-z spatial coordinates in a very short time.
Moreover the topographic survey operations are minimized:
only few known coordinate points are necessary for georeferencing the global points cloud since the registration of
the single scans can be performed through the use of special
Leica targets that can be automatically recognized by the
instrument during the point clouds acquisition*.
Nevertheless if detailed materials colour information are
necessary, for example in order to texture the final 3D
architectural model, the laser scanner acquisition has to be
anyhow supported by a photographic survey**; on the
contrary photogrammetric acquisition allows to achieve, at
the same time, a complete geometric and colorimetric
documentation of the monument.
3.2. Data processing and treatment
The photogrammetry elaboration phase consisted in loading
the single digital images acquired, into an ad hoc software,
Cyclop II of Menci Software, which allows to create
immediately the single stereoscopic couples in order to obtain
three-dimensional management (control, measurement, etc.).
The use of topographic control points in a dedicated software,
Stereo View of Menci Software, allows to link together the
stereoscopic couples in order to explore the single faces of
the monument without interruption: using a specific module
of the same software (SV Plotter) it is indeed possible to
navigate the metric raster stereoscopic strips, in a
stereoscopic environment, so as to perform three-dimensional
measures and conservation status analyses (Menci et al.,
1999).
The raster strips own such a notable quantity and variety of
information deriving from the geometrically controlled
stereoscopic pairs, that the vectorial phase, which often
represents a subjective abstraction from the truth, can be
superfluous.
The creation of all stereoscopic couples of the triumphal arch,
globally 64 models, has been performed in a very short time
considering the rapidity and use facility of the adopted
software.
Moreover the linkage of the single models employed more
time, totally fourteen days, because of the necessity to

*
During the triumphal arch laser scanner survey no special Leica
targets were used; then, for each pair of scans, three common known
coordinate points were acquired. The total topographic support points
number needed is anyhow lower than that one needed for
photogrammetry, since the number of laser scanner scans is lower
than the number of stereoscopic models required for the complete
coverage of the monument.
**
This problem can nowadays easily overcome by the use of a new
type of laser scanner that are provided with an high-resolution
calibrated digital camera so as to simultaneously acquire x-y-z spatial
coordinates and RGB value of every single points.

recognize the acquired topographic and natural points on the
images of the single stereoscopic couples.
The topographical points were also adopted to produce
monoscopic orthorectified images required by the
Superintendence as a basis for the decay mapping but also for
geometric model texture.

Figure 4. Union of different stereoscopic models through the
collimation of topographic control points

As regards laser scanner elaboration phase the different types
of point clouds processing (decimation, meshing process, 3D
modelling, etc.) were critically chosen according to the kind
of analyses carried out and to the final pursued aim.
The result of the laser scanner acquisition was a global
points cloud of about 30 millions of points.

Figure 5. The final points cloud before the meshing of the arch

Post processing data has been carried out with the standard
software for 3D scanners Rapidform XoVTm of INUS
technology, Inc.
The dataset obtained in a non selective way, in which
irrelevant information is mixed with proper one, has been
managed in a several station procedure so to adjust data
clouds and control errors propagation mainly in the
orientation phase.
Depuration of the point cloud has been the first step of data
processing. Spatial filters has been applied to eliminate
overlapped areas and to erase noisy information. Manual
segmentations were also applied to eliminate those features
not eliminated automatically by the software so to obtain the
reduction of the point cloud of about 2.000.000 of points.

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
The semiautomatic registration of the multiple clouds based
on the closest point ICP algorithm, since the Superintendence
for Cultural and Environmental Heritage prohibited the use of
retro reflective targets as tie point for the cloud merging,
provided a residual error of 3.2 mm, obtained as RMS of the
standard deviations of the image pair alignments.
To improve laser scanner point cloud registration digital
images have been used to extract information on edges and
linear surface features.
Once obtained the global georeferenced cloud dataset we
proceeded trough out the reconstruction of the polygonal 3D
digital model to provide a basis for generating drawn Cad
elevations, section and plans of the arch.
Figure 7. 3D model of the basement of the Augustus arch

Some problems seems to be due to reflection on specific
surfaces located on the columns capitals. There could in fact
be potential problems in data acquisition in laser scanning
surfaces of certain minerals such as of granite, marble or
limestone.
A low resolution TIN has been also build so to have the base
for a textured model.

Figure 6. Automatic generation of horizontal and vertical
sections from the 3D model

A multiple resolution TIN, from a 1.000.000 up to a total of
20.340.000 polygons, was obtained through the meshing
automatic process of the INUS software.
In order to generate a complete model of the arch some
editing of the TIN was required, as detecting and fixing
topological or geometrical defects and unnecessary data. The
scan workbench of the software provided indispensable
functions for processing raw scanned data and building up the
whole polygonal model.
A high number of triangles is preserved even in presence of
flat areas so to be able to highlight differences between
different material, identify different phases of repair or use
the resulting TIN in several types of analysis as detection
and monitoring of cracks or documentation of tool marks on
specific areas of the arch itself.
Trough the analysis of the morphology of the model it is
possible to quantify weathering process and determine the
different weathering rates of each part of the arch.
A high quality TIN despite difficulties in handling the large
volumes of three-dimensional dataset permits to measure
fractures orientation, physical weathering such as
microcracking and disintegration of exposed irregular and
rough surfaces of ashlars or even chemical ones such as
dissolution of component mineral grains. The loss in volume
can be assessed quantitatively by the measurement of the
single ashlar volume loss in the model (Accardo et al. 1997).
Using digital surface high detailed model of the arch has the
advantage to be able to measure the deformed shape by
comparing with digital surface model generated at later time.
Laser scanning has been very useful for direct scanning of the
irregular and rough surface of ashlar of the basement which
has been well reconstructed.

Figure 8. Comparison between the original and the compressed
version of the 3D model

Normal mapping was used to re-detail simplified meshes.
Normal mapping adds details to shading without using more
polygons and one of the most interesting use of this technique
is to greatly enhance the appearance of the low poly model
exploiting a normal map coming from the high resolution
one.
An algorithm for the automatic generation of this map is
coupled with the vertex removal mesh compression method.
It requires that, during the geometric compression, the
algorithm keep track of where each removed vertex projects
on the compressed version of the model. When the desired
level of compression is reached, the original vertices are
transposed into the associated triangle in a tessellated map.
The high resolution model with his more than 20 millions of
shape information in a 2 Gb file represents the archival
quality model used for research application and to prepare
lower resolution models suitable for interactive web display.
When the texture maps are applied to the compressed models,
it generates a 3D appearance that approximates the one of the
full resolution model. Thus a close approximation to the
fidelity of the high resolution model is retained in the 3D
model used for museum visualization as well as web
application.

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
4. CONCLUSIONS
Both the two survey technologies described offer several
advantages but also disadvantages, and only their
combination can allow to efficiently achieve an historicalarchitectural building 3D documentation, detailed either from
a geometric and from a colour information point of view.
On the one hand the stereo-photogrammetric survey allowed
to produce, in a relatively short time, 3D raster models,
metrically correct, in which morphological details,
architectural materials and colorimetric definitions are easily
singled out, so as to help chemical and technician experts in
the description of the different monument phenomenology of
materials alteration and decay. The stereoscopic survey can
be indeed considered, without any vectorial restitution, as a
representation of the artefact state of conservation in a
specific time, on which the expert user can perform analysis,
reports of the decay pathologies, hypothesis in order to
program restoration interventions (Salonia et al., 2005).
On the other hand the use of laser scanner technology
allowed to efficiently provide the Superintendence for
Cultural and Environmental Heritage of the Valle d'Aosta
with a complete 3D model of the arch from which it was
possible to quickly and automatically extrapolate geometric
elaborations of the monument (as for example horizontal and
vertical sections), necessary for searching into the presence of
monument static damages.
On the same 3D model it was possible to report the exact
position of the several sensor that were arranged on the
monument in order to estimate the variation of climatic
conditions around artefact surfaces.
Referring to the same geometry all the other data relevant to
the monument state of conservation, the analysis of the
complex relationship between materials and different
alteration phenomenology would be facilitated, as well as the
analysis of decay pathologies variability in relation to their
manifestation in the artefact or to the influence of the
environmental context.
5. REFERENCES
Accardo, G., Appolonia, L., Negri, A., Salonia, P., 1997. An
experimental correlation between factors for evaluation of
damage and the monuments geometry: the case of the Roman
Theatre of Aosta. In: IV International Symposium on the
Conservation of Monuments in the Mediterranean basin,
Rhodes.
Corni, F., 1989. Aosta antica. La città romana, Aosta.
Guarnieri, A., Remondino, F., Vettore, A., 2004.
Photogrammetry and ground-based laser scanning:
assessment of metric accuracy of the 3D model of
Pozzoveggiani church. In: FIG Working week 2004, “The
Olympic Spirit in Surveying”, Athens.
Johansson, M., 2002. Explorations into the Behaviour of
Three Different High-Resolution Ground-Based Laser
Scanners in the Built Environment. In: CIPA WG 6.
International Workshop on Scanning and Cultural Heritage
Recording, Corfu.
Menci, L., Ceccaroni, F., Salonia, P., 1999. The stereoscopic
exploration of 3D-models as instrument of knowledge,
documentation and measurement for mural painting. In:
Proceedings
of
Symposium
ICCROM
Graphic

Documentation Systems in Conservation of Mural Paintings
GraDoc, Rome.
Menci, L., 2000. StereoSpace: an idea for photogrammetric
data collection. In: Proceedings of XIX ISPRS Congress,
Amsterdam.
Salonia, P., Negri, A.,Valdarnini, L., Scolastico, S., Bellucci,
V., 2005. Quick photogrammetric systems applied to
documentation of Cultural Heritage: the example of Aosta
roman city wall, in: CIPA XX International Symposium on
International Cooperation to save the World’s Cultural
Heritage, Torino.
Salonia, P., Scolastico, S., Bellucci, V., 2006. Laser scanner,
quick stereo-photogrammetric system, 3D modelling: new
tools for the analysis and the documentation of cultural
archaeological heritage, In: 2nd international conference on
remote sensing in archaeology, Rome.

