The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

A GIS-BASED CULTURAL HERITAGE STUDY FRAMEWORK ON CONTINUOUS
SCALES: A CASE STUDY ON 19TH CENTURY MILITARY INDUSTRIAL HERITAGE
J. Hea, c, J. Liub, c, S. Xub, c , C. Wub, c, J. Zhangb, c
a Institute of Digital Design, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China - janushe@tju.edu.cn
b International Research Center for Chinese Cultural Heritage Conservation, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China liujing1002@gmail.com, 1421750993@qq.com, wu.cong@hotmail.com, 825209141@qq.com
c School of Architecture, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Commission XX

KEY WORDS: Cultural Heritage, GIS, BIM, Historical Context, Continuous Scales

ABSTRACT:
This paper presents a framework of introducing GIS technology to record and analyse cultural heritages in continuous spatial scales.
The research team is developing a systematic approach to support heritage conservation research and practice on historical buildings,
courtyards, historical towns, and archaeological sites ad landscapes. These studies are conducted not only from the property or site
scales, but also investigated from their contexts in setting as well as regional scales. From these continues scales, authenticity and
integrity of a heritage can be interpreted from a broader spatial and temporal context, in which GIS would contribute through
database, spatial analysis, and visualization. The case study is the construction of a information indexing framework of Dagu Dock
industrial heritage to integrate physical buildings, courtyards, natural settings as well as their intangible characteristics which are
affiliated to the physical heritage properties and presented through historical, social and culture semantics. The paper illustrates
methodology and content of recording physical and social/cultural semantics of culture heritages on different scales as well as
connection between different levels of database.

phenomena which traditional methods are difficult to find, and
enhances our understanding of heritage's authenticity to support
heritage conservation planning, design and management.

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
Geographical information system (GIS) has been introduced in
cultural heritage conservation from early 1990s, and been
blooming in recent year in both practical projects and
contextual historical and archaeological studies. Although many
progress had been made in this field, but as discussed in the
following literature review, most of these GIS systems have
either difficulty for supporting contextual interpretation through
limited physical recordings, or unable to deal with specific
heritage problem because of the large scales of their database
system. In order to investigate cultural heritages from a broader
spatial as well as in-depth historical context, innovative
approaches based on GIS technology are necessary.
This paper presents a framework of introducing GIS technology
to record and analyse cultural heritages in continuous spatial
scales. From the perspective of “historical GIS (H-GIS)”, the
research team is developing a systematic approach to support
heritage conservation research and practice on historical
buildings, courtyards, historical towns, and archaeological sites
ad landscapes. These studies are conducted not only from the
property or site scales, but also investigated from their contexts
in setting as well as regional scales. From these continues scales,
authenticity and integrity of a heritage can be interpreted from
broader spatial and temporal contexts, in which GIS would
contribute through database, spatial analysis, and visualization.
Through a case study on industrial heritage, the paper illustrates
the methodology and content of recording physical and
social/cultural semantics of culture heritages on different scales
as well as connection between different levels of database. The
proposed approach is helpful to reveals new historical spatial

1.2 Industrial Heritages
Industrial heritages consist of the remains of industrial culture
which are of historical, technological, social, architectural or
scientific values. It includes buildings, machinery, workshops,
mills, factories, mines and sites for processing and refining,
warehouses, stores, facilities where energy is generated,
transmitted and used, transport and all its infrastructure, as well
as places used for social activities related to industry such as
residence, worship and education (TICCIH, 2003). In recent
years, industrial heritage conservation has attracted more and
more attention in China. By 2014, there are more than 300
industrial heritages have been inscribed as National Key
Cultural Relics Protection Units. In this circumstance,
information collection and management of this kind of heritages
has become an important issue for Chinese heritage
conservation and related research. However, lack of basic
information, incomplete documentation and insufficient of
awareness of information management and utilization have
restricted systematic and scientific protection of industrial
heritages.
1.3 The Case Study
The research team select the Tianjin Dagu Dock which
belonged to Beiyang Navy of Qing Dynasty of China as a case
study. According to general industrial heritage conservation
requirements and the specific characteristics of the case study,
the research team constructs information indexing framework of
Dagu Dock industrial heritage through a combination of GIS

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

215

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

and building information modelling (BIM), to integrate physical
buildings, courtyards, natural settings, urban contexts as well as
their intangible characteristics which are affiliated to the
physical heritage properties and presented through historical,
social and culture semantics. The paper illustrates the
methodology and content of recording physical and
social/cultural semantics of culture heritages on different scales
as well as connection between different levels of database.

2. LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 GIS as Heritage Conservation Support
As a “spatial toolbox” (Wheatley and Gillings 2002) for
archaeological, historical, cultural and social investigation, GIS
has become an important technology for cultural heritage
conservation in the past two decades. In the discipline of
heritage conservation, GIS technology was firstly adopted in
UNESCO World Heritage Site (WHS) management in 1992 to
establish the Angkor Zoning and Environment Management
Plan (ZEMP) (Wager 1995; Fletcher, et al., 2007). Based on
UNESCO’s technical experience, a GIS-based heritage
management manual published in 1999 demonstrated the
knowledge on and broad level of interest in GIS technological
and methodological developments among the most cutting-edge
groups working on heritage conservation (Box, 1999).
This manual was translated into Chinese and published in 2001.
Introduction of GIS in heritage conservation in China also
started at the same period. An earlier typical application is the
historical town conservation of Xijindu, Zhejiang Province
done by Southeast University in 2000 (Hu, et al., 2002). In
2006, Ministry of Science and Technology of China put
tremendous resources on a key project named “Spatial
Information Technology Application in Great Site
Conservation”. This project investigated potential of spatial
information technologies, which including GIS, remote sensing
(RS), global position system (GPS), and virtual reality (VR), in
cultural heritage conservation, and identified adapted
methodology and suitable technologies in the context of
practices in China. Grand Canal, a WHS was chosen as the
demonstration case study to show the technical supports on
conservation and development (Zhou et al., 2011). Research
groups of Tsinghua University has also explored GIS
application in different kind of projects in the same period. GIS
documentation and visualization was applied to show the
current situation of the building group of Houtu Temple of
Jiexiu, Shanxi Province in its conservation planning (Zhang,
2008). A more detailed database was built on ArcGIS platform
to record and analyze the multi-resource data of the East Hall of
Fougang Temple of Wutai Mountain of Shanxi Province,
including 3D laser scanning, detailed manual measuring and
surveying, materials, broken and lost, and so on. This database
called Culture Heritage Information System (CHIS) was
designed for monitoring the healthy of the specific heritage
property (Zhang et al., 2010). The earliest GIS application in
industrial heritage in China is the database of Hangzhou
Industrial Heritage Database. However, because of insufficient
understanding on industrial heritage characteristics, there were
shortcomings in data collection and database architecture in this
case.
As shown in the ZEMP case, preference for GIS may due to the
fact that the main task of the digital heritage conservation
database at present is focus on documentation and delimitation,

in which GIS is mostly effective (He, 2008). Furthermore, this
application requirement and practical focuses on recording and
management also caused that the GIS database take most of the
efforts on heritages’ physical phenomena. This kind of heritage
GIS system always integrates comprehensive and very detailed
documentation data on physical characteristics of heritage
properties and settings through text descriptions, drawings,
photographs (for example, Riveiro, et al., 2011), and 3D
scanned or virtual models (Tsirliganis, et al., 2004; Styliadis, et
al., 2009; Remondino, 2011; Rojas-Sola, et al., 2011). Most of
these systems have a common problem that only use GIS for
recording properties’ position without further data integration
through geo-referencing approach. Therefore, although within a
same geospatial context, the abundant heritage information of
individual property is always isolated and not able to be
analysed through spatial approaches.
2.2 BIM for Cultural Heritage
BIM modeling which records construction details in 3D and
semantics becomes a new topic in heritage conservation support
recently (Pauwels, et al., 2008; San José-Alonso, et al., 2009;
Oreni, et al., 2012), especially because of the current
development of 3D surveying, modeling and visualization
capability. The authors’ research team is one of the pioneers of
introducing BIM into this field by a heritage conservation
project of Angkor (Wu, et al., 2011). Wu and his colleagues are
continuously working on a cultural heritage information system
for architectural property and the whole site management and
conservation base on GIS and BIM integration in various
Chinese heritages and WHSs, including Ta Keo Temple of
Angkor, Dehe Garden of Summer Palace and Beihai in Beijing
(Wu, 2012). More pure BIM test has been applied on industrial
heritage by the same team (Du, 2013). Recent academic
exploration concentrates on collection and modelling of
historical information which include semantics base on the
study of Yellow Sea Research Society of Chemical Industry
(Shi, et al., 2014). Relevant systems are from a perspective of
professional requirement of information access and query on
both large-scale site and small-scale building levels. They can
be considered as the prior generations of what discussed in this
research paper.
San José-Alonso and colleagues (2009) noticed that BIM
integrated with 3D GIS had great potential for cultural heritage
modeling and integrating intangible information records. In
their system, 3D metadata of both was considered as the key in
the system and data accessing and inquiry are principal
functions. Since semantic elements are crucial in cultural
heritage management, and 3D and hierarchy are almost equality
significant for industrial heritages, City Geography Markup
Language (CityGML) metadata is a good option. CityGML has
been broadly introduced in most of the 3D cultural heritage and
historical development studies in urban or large-scaled contexts
(Alamouri and Kolbe, 2009; San José-Alonso et al., 2009; Limp,
et al., 2010; Manferdini and Remondino, 2010).
2.3 Shortcomings and Perspectives
In general, although GIS system for cultural heritage do have
the shortcomings on semantics and analytical application
described in session 2.1, it is more mature than BIM
applications from the database perspective as well as in
academic research. However, required by conservation
engineering and management, detailed documentation and
visualization of building properties and their structure

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

216

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

components or construction objects are not able to conducted
solely through GIS system because of their complexity. Neither
could any longitude monitoring on structure deformation be
done in pure GIS. In that case, BIM technology can be a
valuable supplement for the constrain of GIS database once
reaching the scale of construction objects (Wu, 2012; Liu,
2013). Information management system in continuous scales
which can record, illustrate and analyse a comprehensive
cultural heritage site, which include spatial scales on setting,
building group, single properties, construction components, and
their temporal changes, are essential in conservation practises.
Integration of GIS and BIM technologies is the key approach to
reach this goal.
3.

and constructions are organized in either CityGML or BIM data.
Semantic information of physical properties, like raster data,
historical records, background documents and social/cultural
descriptions are all draped as attributes of the 3D spatial
elements.
Other than documentation, the database also serves as the
analytical base of in-depth and multidisciplinary studies on the
cultural heritage. In a broader scale, historical interpretation and
spatial phenomena are investigated base on the spatial and
semantic data, while studies on architecture and construction
levels depends on the BIM data (Figure 1).

METHODOLOGY

3.1 The Continuous Scales
The research team proposed a continuous scale composed by
regional, site, and building scales as a framework to organize
information, technologies and methodologies in GIS-based
cultural heritage conservation studies.
1.
Regional scale. In the regional scale, historical
geographical paradigm leads spatial analytical model
making. The historical performance of the heritage site
on politics, economy, cultural and social development are
revealed though GIS spatial analysis, especially historical
phenomena related to large-scale movement, such as
cultural routes.
2.
Site scale. In the site scale, we study ecological and
environmental constraints and impacts, logics of site
selection, subjective or phenomenological meaning of the
landscapes can also be interpreted through GIS-based
spatial analysis. Historical contexts of sites, towns, or
landscapes reconstructed in GIS-based model are key
concerns of the historical interpretation meteorology of
the proposed framework.
3.
Building scale. From a contextual perspective,
heritage properties or asserts can be understood though
inherited historical spatial phenomenon on its landscape
and site scales. Finer-scale analysis on how a single
building cooperate with its setting can be illustrated
though GIS investigation by following the finding
revealed from the upper-level scale. Another important
approach in this scale is interface between GIS and BIM.
This integration is able to create a continuous-scale
database on different LODs.

Figure 1. Structure of the proposed database (He,2012)
3.3 The Case Study
The research team chose Dagu Dock of Beiyang Navyas a case
study. Dagu dock of Beiyang Navy is located in the lower
reaches of the Haihe River in Binhai New Area of Tianjin
(Figure 2). It was built in 1880 by Mr. Li Hongzhang, an exgovernor of Zhili Province of Qing Dynasty. Dagu dock of
Beiyang Navy is the third modern shipyard established in China
after following Fujian Ship-building Bureau and Jiangnan
Manufacturing Bureau, and one of the most important military
base in the late Qing Dynasty It was named the National Key
Cultural Relics Protection Units in 2013, and planned to be
nominated as a candidate for the World Heritage List together
with other two earlier modern shipyards.

3.2 The System for Industrial Heritage
Information collection and recording of industrial heritage is
experience, cognition and understanding, exploration, and
evaluation of a heritage in various aspects of history, science,
technology, humanities and arts. It contains not only the
cognition of the entity and the space, but also the understanding
of the spiritual meaning of the heritage, with value judgment
and information selection. Information collection of industrial
heritage is a series of life-cycle records and management,
involving historical archives, documentation, conservation
planning, construction, monitoring, maintenance, presentation
use and so on. It will build a complete integrated heritage
information service system (Di et al.,2012).
The proposed system uses spatial indices to record all heritage
information in 3D format, including physical properties and
semantic intangible attributes. For the physical parts, landscapes

Figure 2. Location and proposed protection boundary (within
the pink boundary) of the Dagu Dock of Beiyang Navy
(International Research Center for Chinese Cultural Heritage
Conservation of Tianjin University, 2014)

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

217

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

3.4 Data Acquisition
Urban planning

In order to prepare the WHS application in the future, the local
government and International Research Center for Chinese
Cultural Heritage Conservation, e.g. the authors’ research team,
has launched a multi-year research program including site
surveys, historic, social and architectural analyses, conservation
planning, and heritage management. Since heritage site of the
cultural heritage is large and composed by multiple kinds of
properties, detailed site surveying and data acquisition have
been planned during the next few years. Data planned to be
collected includes historical records, maps, physical
architectural recording, and social surveying shown in Table 1.
Classification
Project file

Historical
documents

Name
official document
or remarks,
Project Task
Standing Order
Local
Chronicles,
Inscriptions on a
tablet

Source

Format

City government
bureaus

Digital

Governmental
archives

None
(to be digitized
and rectified)
Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents
(Photo ,Book)

Historical
documents

Historical
materials,
Contract

Archives

Historical
documents

Image, Old
photos

Internet ,digitized

Historical
documents

Historical
maintenance
record

Factory

Historical
documents

Related paper、
book and
Research Report

Internet, Library,
Archives

Information and
drawing

Aerial and
satellite photos

Information and
drawing

Digital Line
Graphic(DLG)
Photo ,slide,
video, rubbings,
etc.

Information and
drawing
Basic
information

Basic
information
Basic
information

Related building
materials of the
factory
Related
equipment
materials of the
factory
Climate,
pollution,
erosion, etc.

City government
and Surveying
Bureau, overseas
archives,
commercial satellite
image distribution
services, etc.
City government
bureaus
Internet, digitized

Digital
Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents
Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents

Factory

New installation on
site

Nearby residents

Field survey

Master plan

City government
bureaus

Digital

3D laser point
cloud

Data
acquisition(2013)

Digital and
geo-referenced

Data
acquisition(2013)

Digital

City government
bureaus

Digital(word.sl
ide,etc.)

City government
bureaus
City government
bureaus

Digital(word.sl
ide,etc.)
Digital(word.sl
ide,etc.)

Urban planning

Industrial heritage integrates physical buildings, courtyards,
natural settings as well as their attached intangible
characteristics which are affiliated to the physical heritage
properties and presents through historical, social and culture
semantics. These often contain multiple scales, such as from 啊
machine to a building, a factory, or an industrial district even to
an industrial town.
By reference to urban planning, industrial heritage conservation
planning and architectural design drawings, etc., the research
team divides the spatial scale of industrial heritage into seven
detailed scales shown in Figure 3 in order to organize heritage
information. Different technologies are introduced to
correspond to different levels of scale base on the research or
practical questions, as well as data characteristics. Except the
regional scale data (Figure 4), the CityGML database combine
the level from the urban level and use 3D objects in lower levels
of detail (LOD) in GIS system as basic unit. Higher LOD
models are imported from BIM data. Organization of physical
heritage properties and LOD levels can be found in more detail
in section 4.1.

Figure 3. Spatial scale of an industrial heritage and
corresponding technologies applied

Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents
Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents

Environment
around

Urban planning

3.5 Database Architecture for Continuous Scales

Digital and
geo-referenced

City government
bureaus

Urban planning

Table 1. Heritage data collected for documentation

Digital(jpg,ppt,
rmvb, etc.)

Archives of
Cultural heritage
protection unit

3D laser
scanning record
table
Master plan,
regulatory plan,
tourism plan.etc.
Environmental
protection plan
Tourism statistics
and related

Digital(word.sl
ide,etc.)

Digital(dwg,jp
g,tif,etc.)

Basic
information

Environment
around
Surveying and
Mapping
Archives
Surveying and
Mapping
Archives

City government
bureaus

geo-referenced

Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents
Digital and
Traditional
paper
documents

Factory

materials
The protection
planning of the
north navy’s taku
dockyard

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

218

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

4.

suggested 2/2 meters in the CityGML standard (OGC,
2007).
LOD3 and LOD4. More detailed elements, such as
structural elements, changing process (see Figure 6),
damaged condition of important buildings (see Figure 7),
special structure or facility of the industrial heritage, like
crane beam, are managed in BIM and transferred into
LOD3 and LOD4 levels.

Figure 4. Spatial distribution and industry types of the industrial
heritages in Tianjin
4.

DATABASE OF DAGU DOCK

4.1 Structure of physical property data organization
Main content of the proposed database integrates GIS and BIM
to organized 3D buildings, urban and landscapes with attributed
social and cultural phenomena in order to record the industrial
heritage comprehensively and profoundly for heritage
management and further application. As mentioned in previous
section, physical properties including courtyards, buildings,
manufactural facilities, environmental settings and other
relevant urban features are depicted through 3D objects. While
intangible social/cultural phenomena are recorded as semantics
of the 3D spatial elements. According to the LOD format of
CityGML models, objects standing for heritage properties are
organized hierarchically to reflect different levels of scale, and
then modelled in different LOD.
1.

2.
3.

LOD0. Besides traditional LOD0 features like the
natural landscape, environmental setting, etc., heritage
property unit defined by an enclosed spatial boundary,
including factory, dock, dyke, or group of buildings,
facilities, contaminated areas, as well as the factory,
construction and dock in the historical period are
depicted through BREP in this level. Format of these
units are polygons draped on the DEM and extruded into
3D.
LOD1. Individual building are the only component in
this level and expressed as simple blocks (see Figure 5).
LOD2. A few significant buildings, all trees and
environment features, and other landscape architecture
elements are depicted in LOD2 since they need to be
recorded and illustrated in detail. Special styles and
shapes of buildings, and textures of landscapes features
are recorded in LOD2 models. Accuracy of details of
LOD2 models may even finer than the typically

Figure 5．LOD1 heritage records of Dagu Dock of Beiyang
Navy (International Research Center for Chinese Cultural
Heritage Conservation of Tianjin University, 2014)

Figure 6．Post-earthquake machinery engineering workshop,
Dagu Dock of Beiyang Navy (International Research Center for
Chinese Cultural Heritage Conservation of Tianjin University,
2014)

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

219

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

which is marked as the yellow rectangle in figure 8. Its was
originated from the Chinese architectural tradition that the
significant building usually locates in the center and in
consequence the Temple plays an important role in the spatial
distribution. People worshiped the Dragon King (the god
manage the sea) before shipbuilding, ship repair, and the launch
of a new ship and going out to sea (Jiang, 2005). This confirms
the combination of early modern industrial civilization and
Chinese traditional sacrifice culture.

Figure 7．The wall damage documentation and partial inner
wall changes of machinery engineering workshop, Dagu Dock
of Beiyang Navy (International Research Center for Chinese
Cultural Heritage Conservation of Tianjin University, 2014)
4.2 Attribute Data of Intangible Phenomena
History and social/cultural phenomena, as mentioned in the
above sections, are recorded as semantics and indexed to the
heritage properties. The major semantics the properties’
physical existences are functionality categories, text
descriptions, temporal changes, industrial behaviours,
continuity and sustainability, multimedia records and so on.
Table 2 shows what kind of attribute information are required to
record important properties of the factory, buildings /structures
and machineries:
Heritage property
Factory

Building/structur
e
Machine

Categories of attribute data
Name, industry category, construction time,
protection level, major products, present situation
description, main technology, important historical
moments/figures and events, document information,
etc.
Name, construction time, critical historical
moment/figures and events, document information,
present situation description, protection level, etc.
Name,
manufacture
date,
model,
product
specifications, manufacturer, trade mark, function,
present situation description, document information,
etc.

Table 2. Attribute data documented for different categories of
heritage property
4.3 Database Application
The proposed database directly serves as the analytical base of
in-depth and multidisciplinary studies. Investigation on building
and structure levels depends on the BIM data, while the
historical interpretation and spatial phenomena are explored
base on the spatial and semantic data. According to historical
records and literature data (Chi, 1930; Culture & History
Committee, Tanggu CPPCC, 2005; Zhou, 1907), the research
team analyses the history of Dagu dock from 1695, the year
when Emperor Kangxi of the Qing Dynasty ordered to rebuild
The Sea God Temple, to 1942 (Figure 8). Spatial construction
of the Dagu Dock is basically around the Sea God Temple

Figure 8. Historial development map of Dagu dock (1695-1942
A.D.)
5. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
This paper illustrates the idea of continuous scales through a
specific case study. Since our regional-scale study of industrial
heritage of China was just started from the initiation of this
comprehensive GIS-based approach, it is still in its primary
stage comparing the more mature database of site and buildings.
In addition, spatial and temporal social and cultural distribution
demonstrated by industrial heritage and their mechanism cannot
be interpreted clearly due to lack of theory and methodology.
Therefore this part is not discussed in the limited content of this
paper. On the other hand, although there are other cases which
may explain the continuous scales in larger scales properly, but
not suitable from the BIM aspect. Paradigm shift in these scales
usually happens within a building. The case study proposed in
this paper still can demonstrate the most typical component of
this framework.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

220

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper and presented researches are supported by the
following research funds: Key Project of National Social
Science Foundation of China (project No. 12&ZD230);
National Major Science and Technology Development Project
of China (project No. 2014BAK09B02); Programme of
Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities of Ministry of
Education of China (project No. B13011); and Natural Science
Foundation of China (Project No. 51178293). The authors
appreciate Dr. Zhu Lei’s contribution at the earlier stage of this
academic idea as well as the prototype of GIS-BIM integration
system.
REFERENCES
Al Amouri, A. and Kolbe, T. 2009. Quality assessment of
historical Baalbek's 3D city model. In: Digital heritage:
Proceedings of the third international Conference, Lund,
EuroMed, pp. 121–125.
Box, P. (eds.), 1999. Geographic Information Systems and
Cultural Resource Management: A Manual for Heritage Site
Managers. Bangkok: UNESCO Principal Regional Office for
Asia and the Pacific.
Du, X., 2013. BIM-based industrial architectural heritage
mapping. Tianjin: Master's thesis of Tianjin University.
Chi, Z. Y.(池仲佑),1930. 海军实记.中国国家图书馆古籍善本
影印本, National Library of China, Beijing.
Culture & History Committee, Tanggu CPPCC, 2005. 北洋水
师大沽船坞. China Culture and History Press, Beijing.
Fletcher, R., Johnson, I., Bruce, E. and Khun-Neay, K., 2007.
Living with heritage: site monitoring and heritage values in
Greater Angkor and the Angkor World Heritage Site. World
Archaeology, 39(3), pp.385-405.
He, J., 2008. GIS-based Cultural Route Heritage Authenticity
Analysis and Conservation Support in Cost-surface and
Visibility Study Approaches. Hong Kong: PhD thesis of The
Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Hu, M. X. and Dong, W., 2002. GIS-based information
systems of Xijindu historical town of Zhenjiang protection and
management. PLANNERS.(3) pp.71-73.
Gröger, G. and Plümer, L., 2012. CityGML – interoperable
semantic 3D city models. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing, 71, pp.12-33.
Isikdag, U. and Zlatanova, S., 2009. Towards defining a
framework for automatic generation of buildings in CityGML
using building information models. In Lee, J., Zlatanova, S.,
Cartwright, W., Gartner, G., Meng, L. and Peterson, M. P.(eds.),
3D Geo-Information Sciences. Springer , Berlin and Heidelberg,
pp.79-96.

S., König.,G,, Nagel, C., Cartwright, W., Gartner, G., Meng, L.
and Peterson, M. P.(eds), Advances in 3D Geo-Information
Sciences. Springer , Berlin and Heidelberg, pp.211-225.
Limp, W. F., Payne, A., Winters, S., Barnes, A. and Cothren, J.
2010. Approaching 3D digital heritage data from a multitechnology, lifecycle perspective. In: Proceedings of The 38th
Conference on Computer Applications and Quantitative
Methods
in
Archaeology
[C/OL].
http://www.cast.uark.edu/assets/files/PDF/CAA_2010_proceedi
ngs_Limp_et_al.pdf (31.Dec.2012)
Manferdini, A. M., and Remondino, F., 2010. Reality-based 3D
modeling, segmentation and web-based visualization. In:
Digital heritage ： Proceedings of the third international
Conference, Lemessos, EuroMed, pp. 110–124.
Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. (OGC). 2007. Candidate
OpenGIS® CityGML Implementation Specification. [R/OL]
Open
Geospatial
Consortium
Inc..
OGC
07062,http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=22120&p
asscode=hfbq2pa6eprrnh9jbyzp (1 Jan. 2013)
Oreni, D., Cuca, B. and Brumana, R., 2012. Three-dimensional
virtual models for better comprehension of architectural
heritage construction techniques and its maintenance over time.
In Ioannides, M., Fritsch, D., Leissner, J., Davies, R.,
Remondino, F. and Caffo, R. (eds), Progress in Cultural
Heritage Preservation. Berlin Heidelberg, Springer, pp. 533–
542.
Pauwels, P., Verstraeten, R., De Meyer, R. and Van
Campenhout, J.,2008. Architectural information modelling for
virtual heritage application. In: Digital Heritage -- Proceedings
of the 14th International Conference on Virtual Systems and
Multimedia, Limassol, pp.18–23.
Rojas-Sola, J.I., Castro-Garcia, M. and del Pilar CarranzaCanadas, M., 2011. Content management system incorporated
in a virtual museum hosting. Journal of Cultural Heritage,
12(1), pp. 74–81.
iveiro, ., Arias, P., Armesto, J. and Ord ez, C., 20 . A
methodology for the inventory of historical infrastructures:
documentation, current state, and influencing factors.
International Journal of Architectural Heritage, 5(6), pp.629–
646.
Remondino F. 2011. Heritage recording and 3D modeling with
photogrammetry and 3D scanning. Remote Sensing, 3(6),
pp.1104–1138
San José-Alonso, J. I., Finat, J., Pérez-Moneo, J. D., FernándezMartín, J. J., and Martínez-Rubio J., 2009. Information and
knowledge systems for integrated models in cultural heritage
[C/OL]. In: Proceedings of 3D-ARCH 2009: 3D Virtual
Reconstruction and Visualization of Complex Architectures.
http://www.isprs.org/proceedings/XXXVIII/5W1/pdf/sanjosealonso_etal.pdf (7 Dec. 2012)

Liu, H. Y., 2013. formationalizing the Architectures in Hexi
Corridor based on CGB Technique. Tianjin: Master's thesis of
Tianjin University

Styliadis, A. D., Akbaylar, I. I., Papadopoulou, D. A.,
Hasanagas, N. D., Roussa, S. A. and Sexidis, L. A., 2009.
Metadata-based heritage sites modeling with e-learning
functionality. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 10(2), pp.296-312.

Laat, R. and Berlo, L., 2011. Integration of BIM and GIS: the
development of the CityGML GeoBIM extension. In Kolbe, T.

Tsirliganis N, Pavlidis G, Koutsoudis A, Papadopoulou D,
Tsompanopoulos A, Stavroglou K, Loukou Z and Chamzas C.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

221

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5/W7, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

2004. Archiving cultural objects in the 21st Century. Journal of
Cultural Heritage, 5(4): 379–384
International Research Center for Chinese Cultural Heritage
Conservation, the general plan for the protection of Dagu Dock
of Beiyang Navy（2015-2030）. Tianjin :Tianjin University
TICCIH, 2003. The Nizhny Tagil Charter for the Industrial
Heritage, http://ticcih.org/about/charter/ (15 July. 2015)
Wu, C., Wu, S., Liu, F., He, X. and Gu, J., 2011. Application of
BIM on Angkor Monuments: a case study on documentation
and research of the South Outer Gopura in Ta Keo Temple,
Angkor Monuments. Proceedings of East Asian Architectural
Culture International Conference (EAAC 2011). Singapore:
National University of Singapore.
Wheatley, D. and Gillings, M., 2002. Spatial Technology and
Archaeology: The Archaeological Applications of GIS. Taylor
& Francis, London and New York.
Wager, J., 1995. Environmental planning for a world heritage
site: Case study of Angkor. Journal of Environmental Planning
and Management, 38(3), pp.419-434.
Wu, L. L., 2012. Study on the Lifecycle Management System of
Architectural Heritage Information based on ArcGIS. Tianjin:
Master's thesis of Tianjin University.
Wu, C., Wu, S., Liu, F., He, X. and Gu, J., 2011. Application of
BIM on Angkor Monuments: a case study on documentation
and research of the South Outer Gopura in Ta Keo Temple,
Angkor Monuments. In: Proceedings of East Asian
Architectural Culture International Conference (EAAC 2011).
Singapore: National University of Singapore
Zhang, R., 2008. The research in protection of the historical
environment in conservation planning of the of cultural relics :
a case study of Jiexiu Temple. The Journal of Architecture,
(03)pp. 88-93
Zhang, R., 2010. survey and research of the East Hall of
Fougang Temple. Journal of ancient garden technology, (03)pp.
29-39.
Zhou, E. R.( 周 尔 润 ) ， 1907. 直 隶 工 艺 志 初 编 ， Beiyang
Official Newspaper Bureau，1907
Zhou, W. S., Huang, J. X., 2011. Application of spatial
information technology in the Beijing-Hangzhou Grand Canal
cultural heritage protection. Science Publishing, Beijing.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-W7-215-2015

222

