ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: A REVIEW
S. Logothetis, A. Delinasiou, E. Stylianidis

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Engineering, School of Spatial Planning & Development, Thessaloniki, Greece,
slogothet@auth.gr, adelinas@auth.gr, sstyl@auth.gr
25th International CIPA Symposium

KEY WORDS: Building Information Modelling, BIM platforms, HBIM, cultural heritage documentation, 3D environments

ABSTRACT:
We discuss the evolution and state-of-the-art of the use of Building Information Modelling (BIM) in the field of culture heritage
documentation. BIM is a hot theme involving different characteristics including principles, technology, even privacy rights for the
cultural heritage objects. Modern documentation needs identified the potential of BIM in the recent years. Many architects,
archaeologists, conservationists, engineers regard BIM as a disruptive force, changing the way professionals can document and
manage a cultural heritage structure. The latest years, there are many developments in the BIM field while the developed technology
and methods challenged the cultural heritage community in the documentation framework. In this review article, following a brief
historic background for the BIM, we review the recent developments focusing in the cultural heritage documentation perspective.

1. INTRODUCTION
BIM has been a growing development within the past decade
in the field of cultural heritage documentation, paving the
way towards a future in the virtually built environment. Many
architects, archaeologists, conservationists, engineers regard
BIM as a disruptive force, changing the way professionals
can document and manage a historical monument. A
monument is a type of structure that was created to
commemorate an important event or a person. This event
maybe has become important to a social group as a part of
their cultural heritage or as an example of the historic
architecture. The term "monument" is often applied to
structures or buildings that are considered examples of
important architectural and cultural heritage.
1.1 Literature Review
The term BIM was first used by Phil Bernstein from
Autodesk. Another theory supports that Professor Charles
Eastman extensively used the term in his books in late 1970.
Later, the term was applied by German Jerry Laiserin to
represent the manufacturing process and to facilitate the
exchange of information in digital form. The first
implementation of BIM was under the Virtual Building
concept in 1987 by the company Graphisoft with platform
ArchiCAD.
Despite the trend of scientific community to adopt the BIM
technology for the design and life-cycle management of
constructions, little research has been undertaken to explore
the value of BIM in the management and documentation of
cultural heritage monuments (Fai et al., 2011).
However, researchers have recently developed different
techniques for the reliable and coherent management of
information related to cultural heritage (Saygi and
Remondino, 2013). The first usage of the BIM for existing
buildings was in research of Arayici in 2008. That advocates
the adoption of BIM in order to move beyond rote 3D

visualization through the incorporation of intelligent,
multifunction and multi representational data. The research
focuses on adapting automated data processing and pattern
recognition that leverages 3D point cloud data towards the
generation of a simple building envelope (Fai et al., 2011).
Furthermore, in two researches (Murphy et al., 2009 &
2011), they developed the Historic Building Information
Modelling (HBIM) for the integration of contemporary
technology and BIM approach in the field of cultural heritage
documentation. It functions as plug-in for BIM and it is a
novel prototype library of parametric objects built from
historic data and a system for mapping the parametric objects
onto a point cloud and image survey data.
This review paper consists of four sections relating to the
trends in BIM technology in cultural heritage documentation.
The first section briefly follows a history of the BIM
development as used in the documentation of cultural
heritage, in order to obtain a 3D representation of a
monument in the form of a structured hierarchical set of
structural elements (such as walls, vaults, roof, decorative
elements etc.). The second section contains a summary of
current available BIM software (commercial and open
source) that are provided. In addition, descriptions are
provided for each platform in order to determine have a
comparative analysis among the various software. The third
section describes the recent BIM applications in world
monuments in order to facilitate the documentation of the
cultural heritage. The final section concludes with a brief
explanation of future BIM uses, developments and trends in
documentation of cultural heritage.

2. BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING
BIM is primarily a 3D digital representation of an
environment, a structure or a building with its intrinsic
characteristics. It consists of intelligent building components

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
177

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

or characteristics of environments which includes data
attributes and parametric rules for each object (Hergunsel,
2011). According to the National BIM Standard-United State
Project Committees (NBIMS-US), BIM is “a digital
representation of physical and functional characteristics of a
facility and a shared knowledge resource for information
about a facility forming a reliable basis for decisions during
its life-cycle; defined as existing from earliest conception to
demolition” (Saeed, 2013).
What we observe, when comparing the two, is that the BIM
tend to be a completely different system from Computer
Aided Design (CAD), due to the fact that the procedures have
now turned into an almost internalised system to integrated
information, when at the same time CAD gets the
information needed through external sources. It is noted that
“a BIM model contains the buildings actual constructions
and assemblies rather than a two-dimensional representation
of the building that is commonly found in CAD-based
drawings” (Krygiel and Nies, 2008). The BIM technology
provides a number of advantages over CAD by being able to
manage information, not just graphics. Also is supporting a
controlled environment which in most commonly
miscommunication eliminates the data redundancy (Bynum,
2010).

structural elements, mechanical systems, materials‟
measurements, data suppliers, scheduling and financial data.
BIM starts from the initial design and during the construction
phase is used as a source of information. All information is
incorporated in a model and thus can be studied securing
valuable time and cost benefits.
The BIM technology contributes to the creation of a digital
representation having all physical and functional building
characteristics in five dimensions (5D). These are the three
(3D) primary spatial dimensions (width, height and depth),
the fourth dimension (4D) is time and the fifth (5D) is cost.
The developed virtual model provides an accurate overall
picture to the project team (architects, civil engineers,
surveyors, mechanical engineers, contractors, conservators,
etc.) (Figure 1). One of the most important BIM‟s
characteristics is the provision of a reliable basis for timely
and quick decisions, helping the involved personnel to
increase quality and productivity in the design but also during
project operation. Since, BIM has greatly evolved in the
recent years by providing high quality information, the
technology help to significantly reduce defects and risks in
all stages of a project.
2.2 The BIM components

Many are the basic capabilities of BIM, with the most
important of them aiming to: develop the strategy of building
project design, construction and maintenance management;
ensure integration management of graphical and
informational data flows, combine the graphical interface
with the information flows and process descriptions;
transform individual executors into teams and decentralise
tools into complex solutions, this leading to individual tasks
being implemented as complex processes; perform life cycle
operations of a construction project more effective, faster and
with lower cost (Popov et al., 2008).
2.1 The technology
BIM technology can realise a 3D virtual model of the
construction to be realised or illustrate an existing model. The
model becomes absolutely comprehensible from all
individuals that participate in its construction while at the
same time provides the possibility of important utilities
during building life-cycle (Brumana et al., 2013).

A BIM is based on components, namely parametric objects
that are stored in object libraries. In fact, these are software
counterparts of the real objects used to construct the physical
building, such as steel beams, concrete slabs, framing,
drywall, ducts, windows, etc. The components are
represented in 3Dmodes while additional information is
stored so as to give make them “intelligent”.
The BIM components contain geometric information,
associated with data and rules. These have a non-redundant
geometry while they have parametric rules that automatically
change associated geometries when inserted into a model or
when changes are made to associated objects. The
components‟ rules are crucial since they can identify when a
particular modification violates object feasibility. The BIM
components have the ability to link or export sets of
attributes such as structural materials, acoustic data, energy
data, cost, etc., to other applications and models (Eastman et
al., 2008).
The amount of the model detail is defined by more
parameters beside width, depth and height. Additional
parameters can be defined such as weight, density, cost, etc.
to give added value to the model used. This reflects when the
building is virtually constructed as it is enriched of
thoroughly defined, intelligent objects. These objects now are
incorporate intelligence; i.e. where they belong, how they are
connected with other objects, what are they comprise from,
etc.

Figure 1: BIM Model
The systems which are using BIM technology differ from the
3D CAD because are "smarter" and can present the
information more detailed; contained information and data
for the whole „construction project‟ such as: drawings,

In modern BIM platforms, we can undoubtedly create and
manage parametric geometries, analysing them in primitives
that can be connected through hierarchical relationships. This
is a perfect procedure when creating simple objects from
software libraries, where constraints and shapes were already
set. However, it is much more difficult when components are
generated to represent heterogeneous and original existing
morphologies (e.g. data using digital photogrammetry or
laser scanning). In this case, BIM designs have to be mostly
remodelled manually, since automatic feature recognition in

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
178

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

available with commercial AEC (Architecture, Engineering,
Construction) computer programs are still not effective
(Garagnani et al., 2013).
In the case of cultural heritage objects things are more
complex as cultural heritage monuments are mainly made of
components and materials whose geometry and
characteristics are not representative for typical software
libraries. A possible solution to the lack of geometric
primitives issue in the current typical BIM software libraries,
involves the so called HBIM approach. In HBIM the
Product Name

Manufacturer

BIM Use
Creating and reviewing
3D models
Creating and reviewing
3D models
Conceptual 3D
Modelling
Conceptual 3D
Architectural Model
Conceptual 3D
Modelling

Revit Architecture

Autodesk

Bentley Architecture

Bentley Systems

SketchUpPro

Google

ArchiCAD

Graphisoft

TeklaStructures

Tekla

DProfiler

Beck Technology

Vectorworks Designer

Nemetschek

Affinity

Trelligence

Edificius

AccaSoftware

Vico Office

Vico Software

Conceptual 5D
Modelling

Revit Structure

Autodesk

Structural

SDS/2

Design Data

Structural

RISA

RISA
Technologies

Structural

Robot

Autodesk

Structural Analysis

Green Building Studio

Autodesk

Energy Analysis

Ecotect

Autodesk

Energy Analysis

Bentley Systems

Structural
Analysis/Detailing,
Quantity Take-off,
Building Performance

Solibri Model Checker

Solibri

Model Checking &
Validation

TeklaBIMSight

Tekla

Model Viewer

xBIMXplorer

Open BIM

IFC viewer

Solibri Model Viewer

Solibri

Model Viewer

Navisworks Freedom

Autodesk

3D Model Viewer

Structural Analysis
Design Detailing,
Building Performance

parametric objects are built from historic data (surveys,
assays and literature) and layered in plug-in libraries aimed to
map the elements onto point clouds data and image survey
data (Dore and Murphy, 2012). Unfortunately, this
methodology assumes buildings to be documented through
correctly organised components, are already presented in
libraries, with limited capabilities to change them in order to
represent possible existing different states (Garagnani et al.,
2013).

Conceptual Design and
Cost Estimation
Conceptual 3D
Modelling
Conceptual 3D
Modelling
Architectural BIM Design
and 3D object CAD

Primary Function

Supplier Web Link

Architectural Modelling
and parametric design.

www.autodesk.com

Architectural Modelling

www.bentley.com

Conceptual Design
Modelling
Architectural Model
Creation
Architectural 3D Model
Application
3D conceptual modelling
with real-time cost
estimating
Architectural Model
Creation
A 3D Model Application
for early concept design
Architectural Modelling
5D conceptual model
generate cost and
schedule data
Structural Modelling and
parametric design
3D Structural Modelling
and Detailing
Full Suite of Structural
Design Applications
Bi-directional link with
Autodesk Revit Structure
Measure energy use and
carbon footprint
Weather, energy, water,
carbon emission analysis
Measure, assess and
report building
performance.
Rules-based checking for
compliance and
validation of all objects
in the model
Combine models, check
for clashes and share
information
Open, view IFC files and
navigate through a model
Open all Standard IFC
Solibri Checker Files
Open, view IFC files and
navigate through a model

www.sketchup.google.com
www.graphisoft.com
www.tekla.com
www.beck-technology.com
www.nemetschek.net
www.trelligence.com
www.accasoftware.com
www.vicosoftware.com
www.autodesk.com
www.dsndata.com
www.risatech.com
www.autodesk.com
www.autodesk.com
www.autodesk.com

www.bentley.com

www.solibri.com

www.teklabimsight.com
http://xbim.codeplex.com
www.solibri.com
www.autodesk.com

Table 1. Commercial and open source BIM tools

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
179

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

3. EXISTING BIM PLATFORMS
The
current
BIM
platforms
are
separated in three distinctly different sets of tools:
1. tools for design 3D models (3D modellers);
2. tools of projection
/
visualisation
models
(Viewers/Surface modellers) and
3. tools of calculating analysis of models (Analysers),
(see http://www.awci.org/pdf/bim.pdf)
There are several major software developers that supply
products with functionality in the BIM world, separated in
commercial platforms and open source platforms. The 3D
modeller is the real BIM tool, working with solid, parametric
objects in sufficient features to virtually construct the
building. In order to realise how the building will “look”, a
surface modeller or a viewer to which all shapes are empty is
necessary. Analysers are normally third-party software that
communicate to the main BIM tool, e.g. analyse data from
the 3D modeller to determine the model‟s energy efficiency
or day lighting (see http://www.awci.org/pdf/bim.pdf).
The commercial and open source software presented in the
following sections is perhaps the most well-known BIM exist
nowadays. There are many more equally important software
and some of them are presented in Table 1.
3.1 Commercial platforms
There are plenty BIM tools used for cultural heritage.Τhe
most popular commercial software are GraphiSoft
ArchiCAD, Autodesk Revit, Bentley MicroStation V8i and
Tekla Structures.
ArchiCAD (Graphisoft) is an architectural design platform,
created around the BIM concept as standalone software. The
modelling of the objects in ArchiCAD can be achieved
through using standard parametric of structure elements. The
elements created as new objects using the embedded scripting
language Geometric Description Language (GDL) or
imported from the software (such as walls, roofs, beams,
slabs, etc.). The use of GDL allows the creation of any
number of rich parametric BIM objects and for their storage
in internal libraries or databases for further reuse or
modification (Murphy et al., 2011).
Revit Autodesk is also BIM software that gives the
possibility to the user to create a mass model with a
combination of void and solid forms. The faces of the mass
volume can be converted into building elements and floors
and other architectural elements can be generated inside the
mass model (Boeykens et al., 2008). Autodesk expanded this
BIM platform and created three Revit products: Architecture,
Structure and MEP. Revit is one of many varieties of BIM
software which support the open XML-based IFC standard,
developed by the ΒuildingSMART organisation. This file
type makes it possible for a client or general contractor to
require BIM-based workflow from the different discipline
consultants of a building project.
Bentley Systems offers a wide range of related products for
architecture, construction and engineering. The architectural
BIM platform, Bentley Architecture that presented in 2004 is
an evolution of software Triforma. The latest software is the
MicroStation V8i that used for the AEC (Architecture,
Engineering, and Construction). Also, additional operations
of all infrastructure types including buildings, roads, bridges,
utility systems, railway lines, communication networks,

wastewater networks, water, process plants, mining etc. The
MicroStation can be used either as a software application or
as a technology platform.
The platform provides immersive interaction with 2D
drawings and 3D models, to produce trusted deliverables
such as 3D plots, information-rich 3D PDFs and precise
designs. The analysis capabilities and data enable
performance simulation of designs, including animations and
lifelike renderings. Furthermore, the ability to integrate a
comprehensive breadth and depth of engineering geometry
and data from an unmatched range of CAD software and
engineering formats ensures that users can work seamlessly
with the entire project team.
The MicroStation is used as technology platform for specific
applications. Bentley and other software vendors use such
technology platforms. It offers subsystems for consistent
integration of data, geometry and increasing the user
experience across a broad portfolio of comprehensive
engineering, design and simulation applications. The
platform ensures and leverages for each application the
advantages, enabling in multidisciplinary groups to benefit
from an interoperable software portfolio (Bentley, 2015).
Tekla Structures is a BIM software that enables the creation
and management of accurately detailed and highly
constructible 3D models irrespective of material or
complexity of the structure. Tekla models can be used to
cover the whole building process from conceptual design to
construction and the management of the structure. The
software can be used to interface with other existing
applications, or as a platform to develop an internal
customizable solution. It is an open solution that supports
standardisation and interoperability.
The software supports interfaces with: DWG, IFC, DGN,
DXF, CIS/2, DTSV and SDNF file formats. Tekla Structures
has the ability to model structures that incorporate all kinds
of structural materials and detailing; its ability to support
very large models and concurrent operations on the same
project and with multiple simultaneous users. It supports
compilation of complex parametric custom component
libraries with little or no programming (Eastman et al., 2008).
3.2 Open source platforms
Many software companies have developed several
commercial platforms for BIM. In the field of open source
platforms we observe an inadequate collection of tools. Most
of them belong to the category of tools for projection and
visualisation models.
Edificius (Acca Software) is an advanced design tool for
BIM. Professionals can obtain: section views, elevation
views, floor plan views, tables, reports, construction details,
schedules, perspective views, isometric views, renderings,
animations and photo inserts.
This software allows the use with custom working drawing
layouts and import/export in standard formats such as
DXF/DWG for CAD drawings, OBJ and 3DS for 3D models,
BMP and JPG for renders. Projects and professional
collaborations are possible to be shared with every designer;
all data is saved in a single file that anyone can open and
work with the Edificius Free UPP. Edificius Free UPP
increases the BIM potential by integrating the features of
other software:

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
180

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

•
•
•
•

PriMus for bills of quantities
SketchUp for solid modelling
Edificius-CAD for DWG CAD drawings
EdiLus for structural calculations

Tekla BIMsight is a BIM software application based on
construction project collaboration. The entire workflow can
combine the models, control the clashes, and share the
information using the same easy to use BIM platform. The
Tekla BIMsight enables project participants to identify and
solve issues already in the design phase before the final
visualisation.
Autodesk Navisworks Freedom software is a free viewer
for NWD and DWF file formats. The use of Navisworks
Freedom extends the whole-project view to all stakeholders,
helping to improve the collaboration and communication.
With such software it is possible to create multi-disciplinary
models in a wide range of applications, including information
from BIM, digital prototypes and process plant design. All
ofthese can be combined into a single integrated project
model and published into the NWD format. The published
file provides access to: object properties, model hierarchy
and embedded review data, including animations, viewpoints
and comments.

4. BIM FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE
The plug-in HBIM is a library of parametric objects that
created from historic data. Furthermore, it is a system for
mapping the parametric objects onto a point cloud and the
survey image data. The HBIM process is started with distant
collection of survey data using terrestrial laser scanning or
digital photogrammetric modelling.
In building parametric objects, the problem of file format and
exchange of data has been overcome by using Geometric
Description Language (GDL). The scripting in GDL allows
for sharing and editing of the parametric objects at different
levels (Murphy et al., 2012).
The use of historic data introduces the opportunity to develop
detail behind the object‟s surface concerning its methods of
construction and material composition. In the last stage of the
HBIM process, the libraries of parametric objects are mapped
onto the point cloud and image survey data using a platform
of cross software management. Full engineering orthographic
drawings and 3D models can be automatically produced from
the HBIM (Murphy et al., 2011).
In addition, benefits of generating heritage structures in a 3D
BIM environment:
•
Remote reviewing of the building exterior and
interior.
•
Allows study with new structures in the
environment context.
•
Possibility to survey of different periods of time.
•
Better estimation of the structure using images to
understand texture, massing and form.
•
Allows appreciation of renovations and adaptations
prior to committing to a strategy and full
construction documents.
•
Most people can understand a 3D building more
than a 2D flat drawing (Maddigan, 2012).

4.1 BIM applications in the cultural heritage context
There are different BIM applications in the cultural heritage
context and this section describes characteristic cases. One of
them is the Basilica of St. Maria of Collemaggio in L‟Aquila
of Italy that was damaged by the earthquake in 2009. In this
survey created a 3D detailed model (Figure 2) to support the
on-going design project of conservation and intervention of
the damaged temple parts. The HBIM model manages the
stages of simulation of structural behaviour, analysis,
economic evaluation of the project, and restoration of the
temple (Oreni et al., 2014).

Figure 2.3D ©Revit model of the Basilica St. Maria and
WBS to manage the restoration (Oreni et al., 2014)
Another BIM application is the modelling of the Henrietta
Street, in Dublin, of Ireland. The process started with laser
scanning and the final orthographic images was imported into
the BIM platform ArchiCAD. The use of laser scanning and
photogrammetry can record very high and accurate levels of
detail in the field for cultural heritage. Next, the modelling
was completed by combining all the required library parts
included in the HBIM plug-in. The final stage is converting
the HBIM model (Figure 3) for Henrietta Street into
CityGML for further GIS analysis. For this purpose Google
SketchUp with the CityGML plug-in was used. Finally, the
integration to CityGML can provide further capabilities for
linking the information systems with 3D heritage model. The
CityGML model can be integrated into GIS systems for
analysis and efficient management that is required for
maintaining important heritage monuments (Dore and
Murphy, 2012).

Figure 3. Final HBIM Model of the Henrietta Street (Dore et
al., 2012)
Another project describes the Batawa project-model that is a
redevelopment proposal for approximately 600 hectares of
land that includes a former factory in Toronto (a cluster of
three 19th century heritage buildings) with its rich history of
modern architecture and town planning. The purpose is to
document the heritage assets of Batawa and to develop a BIM
model using available software packages that are appropriate
for specific applications (AutoCAD, Civil 3D, SketchUp,
Revit,). That will serve as a digital archive to help in
conserving the extant heritage buildings and planning and to
test future development proposals within the context of these
historic buildings and plans (Fai et al., 2011).

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
181

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

The Batawa project brings together heterogeneous datasets
into a single digital object that allows access to, and on-going
verification of the individual assets that comprise the
integrated model. This includes data related to the type of the
building, performance and construction, as well as material
typically associated with intangible heritage such as
storytelling and music. The model uses point cloud data
acquired through terrestrial laser scanning. In order to bring
all the pieces together into a single model Navisworks used, a
robust project management tool that is able to integrate the
diverse software required for the project (Fai et al., 2011).

The last example refers to the valuation and dissemination of
the role of the Church of Santa Maria at Scaria in Como of
Italy. The study attempted to explain the reconstruction and
the main transformations and chronological phases of the
church, from the Romanic to the Baroque interventions and
to the more recent ones. For this purpose, laser scanning and
photogrammetric surveys have been carried out with on-site
stratigraphic analysis while available historical documents
have used as well. An integrated BIM approach (Figure 6,
with Autodesk Revit 2013) has been chosen as an
experimental way of transmitting a piece of the church‟s life
history to the local people and also for touristic purposes. The
aim of the research was also to designate the potential BIM
platform when used for energy analysis with the appropriate
tools for life-cycle building management and energy
efficiency. Finally, the research applied the Building
Performance Analysis with collaboration of BIM platform
and Autodesk‟s web-based energy analysis software the
Green Building Studio (Brumana et al., 2013).

Figure 4. Final HBIM Model of factory (Fai et al., 2011)
The 3D environment (Figure 4) was created to allow the
navigation for maintaining the BIM intelligence of the
objects that comprise the model. This way we can examine
the model at both micro and macro scales with no loss of
reliability or data. Then, intangible heritage information was
incorporated such as historical images and texts, multilanguage storytelling, and music. Finally, the Batawa Model
can be viewed trans-temporally by employing the timeline
function of the project management software (Fai et al.,
2011).
One more case describes the procedures for the visualisation
of Sant‟ Apollinare Nuovo in Ravenna of Italy: the Byzantine
church with walls covered with mosaics. For the monument‟s
modelling, the data were acquired using a Leica ScanStation
C5 laser scanner which where integrated with the dense point
surfaces obtained through digital photogrammetry, using
Menci Z-Scan software. The final result was a model (Figure
5) of the inner nave, including some details captured with a
higher number of points: point clouds were superimposed in
order to get a complete documentation of the walls and
mosaics. The point clouds were registered, decimated and
processed in order to be transformed in a proper geometric
input for Autodesk Revit Architecture 2012. A simple plug-in
for Revit, the GreenSpider, was used to layout points in space
as if they were nodes of an ideal cobweb. The parametric
production of smart elements is easier and much more
accurate. This application is able to translate points into
native reference snaps aimed to allow elements modelling
with much more precision instead of a simple tracing out
(Garagnani and Manfredini, 2013).

Figure 5. Final HBIM Model of pillar (Garagnani and
Manfredini, 2013)

Figure 6. HBIM Model of the church St. Maria di Scaria,
with stratigraphic information related to each singular object
(Brumana et al., 2013)
5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
The paper presents a review of the BIM use in the field of
cultural heritage documentation. The diversity and
complexity of BIM technology is obvious in many different
fields; environment, buildings, construction, monument,
structure framework.
We report the existing BIM platforms. On one hand the most
popular commercial software for HBIM which are quite
many while they are expensive enough and inaccessible for
researchers and SMEs. On the other hand, in the field of open
source no outstanding platforms for HBIM exist. In practice,
there are some model viewers; however, there is only one
complete ΒΙΜ platform.
In addition, we reported five (5) of the most representatives
BIM applications in the area of cultural heritage, the majority
of them from Italy.
The review of the current BIM applications illustrates that
most researchers adopt a particular methodology for
developing a HBIM for historic environments and structures.
In practice, this process starts with data collection and data
processing, e.g. laser data and images; identify the structural
details from historic and architectural books; create the
database of parametric historic objects; correlation of
parametric objects onto laser data and final the production of
the survey drawings for the 3D historic virtual model. In this
detailed 3D model more details can be included about the
various objects such as construction materials, schedules for
cost decay, energy etc. adding intelligent data to the point
cloud.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
182

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W3, 2015
25th International CIPA Symposium 2015, 31 August – 04 September 2015, Taipei, Taiwan

This review showed that many developments occurred the
last year in the area of BIM while the potential for many
more exist. There is a still lot of space for more and more
developments. In the area of open source platforms it seems
that many more could be done to moderate the high prices in
the existing commercial platforms.

REFERENCES
Arayici, Y., 2008. Towards Building Information Modelling
for Existing Structures, Structural Survey, 26.3, 210-222.
Bentley MicroStation, 2015. http://www.bentley.com/enUS/Products/microstation+product+line/, (20-02-15).

Murphy, M., McGovern E., et al., 2009. "Historic building
information modelling (HBIM). "Structural Survey Vol. 27
(Iss: 4,): 311 – 327.
Murphy M., McGovern E. & Pavia, S. 2011. 'Historic
Building Information Modeling - Adding Intelligence to
Laser and Image Based Surveys', 4th ISPRS International
Workshop, 3D ARCH 2011: "3D Virtual Reconstruction and
Visualization of Complex Architectures" Trento, Italy, 2-4
March 2011.

Boeykens, S. and H. Neuckermans. 2008. "Scale Level and
Design Phase Transitions in a Digital Building Model."
http://www.asro.kuleuven.be/IDEA.

Murphy, M., Dore, C., 2012. Integration of Historic Building
Information Modeling (HBIM) and 3D GIS for Recording
and Managing Cultural Heritage Sites, 18th International
Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM):
“Virtual Systems in the Information Society”, 2-5 September
2012, Milan, Italy, pp. 369-376.

Brumana R., Oreni D., Raimondi A., Georgopoulos A.,
Bregianni A., 2013. From survey to HBIM for
documentation, dissemination and management of built
heritage. Digital Heritage International Congress (Digital
Heritage), Oct. 28-Nov. 1 2013, Marseille, pp. 497 – 504.

Oreni D., Brumana R., Della Torre S., Banfi F., Barazzetti
L., Previtali M., 2014. “Survey turned into HBIM: the
restoration and the work involved concerning the Basilica di
Collemaggio after the earthquake (L'Aquila)”, ISPRS
Technical Commission V Symposium, 23–25 June 2014, Italy.

Bynum P., 2010. Building Information Modeling in Support
of Sustainable Design and Construction, University of
Florida.

Popov, V., Mikalauskas, S., Migilinskas, D., Vainiunas, P.,
2006. “Complex Usage of 4D Information Modeling Concept
for Building Design, Estimation, Scheduling, and
Determination of Effective Variant”.

Dore, C., Murphy, M., 2012. Integration of Historic Building
Information Modeling and 3D GIS for Recording and
Managing Cultural Heritage Sites, 18th International
Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia: "Virtual
Systems in the Information Society", 2-5 September, 2012,
Milan, Italy, pp. 369-376.

Saeed KIA, 2013. Review of Building Information Modeling
(BIM) Software Packages Based on Assets Management,
Amirkabir University of Technology, Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, 27 March 2013.

Eastman C., Teicholz P., Sacks R., Liston K., 2008. “BIM
Handbook, A guide to Building Information Modeling for
Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers, and Contractors”,
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey

Saygi, G., Remondino, F., 2013. Management of
Architectural Heritage Information in BIM and GIS: State-ofthe-art and Future Perspectives. Int. Journal of Heritage in
the Digital Era, Vol.2(4), pag. 695-714, DOI 10.1260/20474970.2.4.695.

Fai S., Graham K., Duckworth T., Wood N., Attar R., 2011.
Building Information Modeling and Heritage Documentation,
CIPA 2011 Conference Proceedings: XXIIIrd International
CIPA Symposium.
Foundation of the Wall and Ceiling Industry, 2009. Building
Information Modeling: Understanding and Operating in a
New
Paradigm,
Falls
Church,
http://www.awci.org/pdf/bim.pdf
Garagnani, S., Manfredini, A. M., 2013. Parametric
Accuracy: Building Information Modeling Process Applied
to the Cultural Heritage Preservation, 4th ISPRS
International Workshop “3D-ARCH”, Trento, Italy
.
Hergunsel, M. F., 2011. Benefits of Building Information
Modeling for Construction Managers and BIM-based
scheduling, Worcester Polytechnic Institute.
Krygiel, E., Nies, B., 2008. Green BIM: Successful
Sustainable Design with Building Information Modeling, 1st
ed., Wiley, New York.
Maddigan, J. 2012. HCF National Heritage Summit,
Canadian Association of Heritage Professionals.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprsannals-II-5-W3-177-2015
183

