ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

CHALLENGES, STRATEGIES AND TECHNIQUES FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAINING
IN TECHNOLOGY FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE CONSERVATION
R. Eppich a, A. Almagro Vidal b
a

Tecnalia Research & Innovation, Parque Tecnológico de Vizcaya, Derio, Spain. rand.eppich@tecnalia.com
b
Fundación Especial Caja Madrid, Madrid, Spain. ana.almagro@gmail.com
CIPA Heritage Documentation XXIV International Symposium

KEY WORDS: Technology education, training, capacity building, cultural heritage, conservation, preservation education,
International Digital Divide
ABSTRACT:
Technology to document and investigate cultural heritage sites is rapidly advancing – multispectral and high dynamic range
imaging, spherical high resolution photography, three-dimensional laser scanning and unmanned aerial vehicles are only a few of the
new technologies available to heritage conservation professionals to record monuments, buildings, city centres and landscapes.
These advanced tools are giving architects, engineers and conservation professionals’ new insights and additional information which
helps to make better informed decisions.
But this technology and the knowledge about its correct use are extremely unevenly distributed across the world. The Digital Divide
is present and growing in the field of cultural heritage preservation (Letellier, 2001). Many of those responsible for the management,
maintenance and care of some of the world´s most significant cultural heritage sites do not have access to or information about the
latest technologies. They are also confronted with an overwhelming assortment of new technologies and consultants or developers
that promote them and therefore must allocate their limited budgets with limited information.
What is to be done about bridging this gap? Obviously cost and accessibility are issues. However one of the most important
challenges to be addressed is education. As the base knowledge of these technologies is very uneven this leads to further questions:
Are there strategies or methodologies for teaching this technology? How to combine and balance different professional backgrounds
from different and so unevenly distributed places around the world and provide them all with useful information to make good
documentation and conservation decisions?
This paper will describe the methodology developed over the last ten years in teaching documentation technologies to diverse groups
of cultural heritage professionals and students from Côte d´Ivoire, Germany, Belgium, Kosovo, Albania, Nigeria, Egypt, Japan, Iraq,
Jordan, Argentina, United Arab Emirates, United States of America and around 20 other countries. These strategies deal with
establishing methodologies and guiding principles for the selection of technologies, highlighting successful illustrated examples,
levelling uneven educational bases and gaining access to expertise. The authors have developed these strategies and techniques to
appeal, engage and succeed with such diverse groups - to encourage the participants to cooperate on a common goal and overcome
specific challenges while embracing the technology and thinking critically about its appropriate application for the conservation of
cultural heritage in their home countries. Other strategies include setting norms that respect the various cultures and differing levels
of technology education, offering voluntary sessions for more advanced and ambitious participants, finding and then adopting
natural leaders as co-instructors and offering a mix of sessions including standard lectures combined with field and laboratory
exercises and distance learning. This methodology and strategies have proven to be successful as the participants have provided
positive evaluations months and/or years after the courses, implemented their own courses using the materials and methods and have
established a strong, sustainable network related to this topic.

1. INTRODUCTION
A single monument, archaeological site, group of buildings,
landscape or historic town centre are cultural places or locations
that have a special meaning and values including physical,
historical and spiritual aspects. The protection or conservation
of such places means all the processes of looking after it as to
retain its cultural significance. This involves all efforts,
measures and actions to safeguard, protect, preserve, and
transmit cultural significance (Australia ICOMOS, 1999).
This abbreviated definition includes an in-depth understanding
of a cultural place in order to properly provide protection. This

understanding is achieved, in part, through documentation or
evidence (Clark, 2001). Documentation functions as both a verb
and a noun and is a collection of data and/or information that
assists in reaching informed conservation decisions.
Increasingly the information needed to make these decisions is
obtained through the use of technology and recording tools
(Letellier-Leblanc, 2007). Some of these technologies have
only recently been developed and older tools have undergone
radical improvements. Reliance on technology for
documentation has been on the steep upward slope of the
adoption curve for at least the last fifteen years (Eppich-Hadzic,
2013) (Figure 1).

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 109

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

4) Attractive. Many historic places around the world such as
the Taj Majal, the Alhambra or Notre Dame are all very
attractive and famous places and are often used to help
“selling” advanced technology. Inventors and developers of
technology
often
like
to
point
their
devices/inventions/creations at these attractive famous sites
rather than other heritage places that have other nonaesthetic values. They also like to be seen as doing “good”
by helping to record these places. While this is of great
service, this paradox provides exposure to the latest
technology at the most attractive places while often
ignoring other less well known or less attractive locations
that are just as worthy of the application of the latest
technology. In addition many of these famous sites are
recorded multiple times, resulting in overlapping
documentation projects.

Figure 1. Number of articles published concerning advanced
technology for documentation in five year segments. This
article graph clearly shows an increase in the use technology
(Eppich-Hadzic, 2013)
1.1 The Digital Divide
This increase in the use of technology for documentation of
cultural heritage places has led to a gap or divide between those
who use it and those who do not have access, understanding or
the required budgets. The International Digital Divide (Rogers,
2001) -access to technology- is well known around the world in
many varied professions. Specifically within the conservation
profession this divide is present and rapidly growing (ChenWellman, 2004). This divide is due to a unique combination of
circumstances:
1) Multidisciplinary. The problems associated with the
conservation of historic places are varied, complex and
range from the materials and environmental situation to
legal protection, economic and social values. Therefore the
field requires a wide variety of talents in order to
successfully protect a historic place. This results in a
diversity of backgrounds and educations and thus differing
levels of knowledge, education and comfort with
technology.
2) International. Historic places are widely dispersed around
the world with many places in the developing world where
access, knowledge or resources to use the most recent
technology are not readily available. This is simultaneously
made better and worse as there are many international nongovernmental and inter-governmental agencies seeking to
protect these places that do have the resources and thus
highlight and emphasize this divide.
3) Funding. The conservation profession is financially
challenged in comparison to other fields. Conservation
works are usually time consuming due to the uniqueness of
each place and understanding the associated problems, the
necessity of in-depth historic and material research. In
addition practitioners often require extensive and advanced
training.

5) Innovation. The pace of technology is accelerating. New
developments in 3D laser scanning, multispectral imaging
and UAV technology (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles), to name
a few, are giving the field new choices every year. Even
specialists or professional users have sometimes difficulties
keeping up with the latest technology.
What is to be done about bridging the Digital Divide within
cultural heritage conservation? Obviously cost and accessibility
are issues. However the most important challenge is education.
Are there any strategies or methodologies for teaching this
technology? How to combine and balance different professional
backgrounds from different and uneven places around the
world? Given the challenges outlined above specialized
teaching techniques are necessary to close or bridge this gap
especially when working with a diverse, international group of
professionals with a wide variety of applications and
technology. This methodology and these teaching techniques
evolved according to this situation, but were also deliberately
developed to address the specific challenges to cultural heritage
conservation.
This paper is a summary of over 10 years of training, university
and capacity building programs conducted under the aegis of
ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the
Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property) (Almagro
Vidal, 2005), The Getty Conservation Institute (GCI),
UNESCO World Heritage Centre, World Monuments Fund,
Escuela de Estudios Árabes-CSIC, Fundación Caja Madrid and
Tecnalia Research & Innovation (ICCROM-GCI 2003, 2005,
2007, 2009). These programs have lasted from two months to
just a few days and included participants from both sides of the
International Digital Divide. This paper will describe the
background and objectives of the courses, strategies developed
for teaching technology, methodology and shortcomings.
Results will also be described as well as conclusions.
1.2 Methodology
The following teaching methodology for technology was
developed in several ways: first, in consultation with
experienced international educators, experts and colleagues in
the field from the various institutions sponsoring these
programs as well as the authors' own experiences teaching and
lecturing at universities. Advice was obtained from three fields:
conservation, education and technology. The methodology also
included incorporating extensive research and reading
published materials on technology training. New documentation

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 110

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

techniques were also incorporated into the methodology by trial
and error, assessing results over the course of 10 years. This
gave the authors a laboratory to experiment and refine teaching
techniques. Finally, and most importantly, the participants and
instructors have been extremely useful in providing honest
direct feedback. They have been open and communicative
immediately after the course but also years later and sometimes
justifiably harsh. Both participants and instructors have gone on
to form their own courses, have used the material and have
provided additional feedback, which led to further refinement of
the methodology. The course methodology will be described in
three phases – pre-course, during the course and follow-up after
the course.

were assigned tasks to accomplish before they arrived at the
training locations. Such tasks included studying tools or
methods that were identified during the application process.
This would help them arrive prepared and maximize the time
available before the course began. The course also had a
preparation week that was less intensive. This allowed
participants to arrive early and have one-on-one sessions if they
required specific training before the course began. It also
allowed the coordinators a ´buffer´ to ensure that the main
course began on time. This ´buffer´ was necessary as many
participants had visa issues and were coming from long
distances and therefore with a need to recover from jet-lag.
2.2 Establishing Norms

2. PRE-COURSE
The first step in this methodology was extensive preparations
before the courses, often many months and in some cases years
before the courses began. This point cannot be stressed enough,
that there was sufficient time to prepare the materials,
coordinate the instructors and select and communicate with
participants. This differs from many regular courses in
technology as there was no set schedule as at a university or
secondary education level. Many times the cultural response
rate or frequency of communication is very different depending
upon the customs of the participants´ countries. In North
America and Europe the expected response rate to an email or
telephone call is within 24 hours but this is not the case in many
other regions of the world, therefore sufficient time was
required to expect responses and pre-course communication
time was a critical issue.
2.1 Preparation
Selection: During course formation very careful selection was
made of all course participants through a paper/on-line
application. While this in itself is not unique the authors added
a personal interview process to understand the motivations and
needs of the potential participants. This process included
specific questions formulated and presented to the applicants
about their expectations, experience and course requirements
adjusted for various levels of technology education. Extreme
care was exercised as to not bias the results. The review process
for participants was individual with a final discussion and
weighed evaluation that included the needs and available
resources of the participants´ home countries.
During this phase gaps in the potential participants´ technical
knowledge were uncovered. This helps later in assigning prework to the participant to assist them in preparing for the
course. This individual contact was important in determining
the technical knowledge as well as English language
capabilities. This careful selection phase helped the
coordinators custom tailor the course to fit the group of
participants. For example, one participant from Côte d´Ivoire
required a country wide survey and stated this in the
application, therefore the coordinators changed the preliminary
program to include a global positioning technology exercise to
reach his specific expectations, which resulted also very useful
for many others. This proved to be one of the most successful
course modules.
Short Duration: Because most international training courses
are very short in duration it was important to maximize the time
available. Therefore the participants that were finally selected

All participants upon arriving to the training sessions had a oneon-one discussion with a course coordinator. This private
meeting was essential as it allowed the more timid participants
or those with limited English skills time and space to talk and
understand the expectations of them as well as inform them of
the course standards. These standards or norms included respect
for other participants´ culture, background and level of
technological knowledge. This was extremely important as
many participants arrived from countries or territories that are
at ideological odds with one another such as Palestine and
Israel, Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia and
Macedonia, Greece. It also conveyed the idea that not everyone
is beginning from the same technological base and there must
be tolerance and understanding between individuals; that the
technological knowledge is not a factor in the value or worth of
an individual. These one-on-one discussions also assisted in
discovering special talents of the individuals that may not have
been described during the application process, and to reinforce
each participant to share their specific know how, to be open to
help the others as far as possible. This establishing of norms
helped in many aspects of the course including team forming
and personal introductions, coordinator introductions and put
the courses on a personal level of cooperation.
3. COURSE WORK
The pre-course preparations assisted greatly in preparing both
the participants as well as the coordinators. It informed the
coordinators about the technological level of the incoming
group of participants and allowed fine-tuning of the course
materials and schedule. Once the course began:
3.1 Active Involvement
Participants: Part of the course norms include that those
involved in the training exercises are participants and not
students. They were informed that they are required to actively
participate, involve themselves not as a passive student but as
engaged members of the programme. It was communicated that
their active involvement was absolutely necessary for a
successful course. With such small and short courses there was
no room for passive ´listening´. An important part of this
involvement included helping others with less of a
technological base. For example, one of the software that is
necessary for digital drawing and processing data in these
courses is AutoCAD (or similar programs). Not all participants
had sufficient knowledge of this technical software. Therefore
those participants who had knowledge of this software were
told that they must help others to using it; that they are in
essence also instructors and coordinators. This resonated well

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 111

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

with many of the participants as they took an active role in
assisting other participants with less technical knowledge.
Presentations: Another part of their active involvement was
that the participants were required to present their own
specialized work – reinforcing the idea that they were also
instructors. Time was made available for the participants to
lecture to the others on their own work, use of technology and
specific needs and problems of their countries. This
accomplishes three things. First, it engages the more reluctant
participants; secondly, it informs the other participants of the
situation in other regions of the world; and third, it gave a sense
of pride and recognition of the work of the participants and
allowed them to speak out and prevented the discussions from
being dominated by more vocal individuals. This was
particularly important for those with less developed English or
technological skills. Often the coordinators discovered that
many of the participants have specialized technical work that in
some cases exceeded that of the instructors.
Team Forming: One of the most successful aspects developed
during these training courses was team formation. Carefully
chosen teams comprising of 2-5 individuals were formed
balancing in terms of technical abilities and knowledge,
backgrounds and language skills. If one participant knew more
about digital photography they were paired with an individual
that did not know this subject. In the cases where these teams
are larger they are often asked to elect a spokesperson. Many of
these team members become lifelong friends maintaining
contact years after the training courses.

Figure 2 and 3. Left, team evaluating wall frescos at the
ICCROM-GCI ARIS course, 2007
Right, team evaluating stone deterioration at the ICCROM Built
Heritage Course, 2012
3.2 Product Goals
Final Product: One of the binding factors during these training
sessions is that at the end of the course a final finished product
was expected. This was done for several reasons; first, if there
was a common goal often participants worked harder and
cooperated together to accomplish this goal and secondly it
provided needed information for an upcoming conservation
project. The participants were informed of the clear intentions
and outcomes of this final product and the need to accomplish
this goal. For example, in the damaged frescos of the Church of
Santa Cecilia in Rome the paintings were to undergo
conservation treatment and the superintendent responsible for

the works required a base record of the walls. The participants
were informed of this work and it motivated them to complete a
project and work together. After the course the results were
presented to the superintendent and a small publication
produced.

Figure 4. Final product of the ICCROM-GCI training program
in 2007. The 3D model with rectified photographs of the left
aisle of the Church of Santa Cecilia, Rome
Connecting Years: During the courses developed in Rome a
presentation of other past courses was always scheduled. This
set the standard for their work and gave participants a goal for
meeting or exceeding the work of past courses. It also informed
them that their work would be appreciated in coming years and
held in high regard. In addition a key past participant from the
previous year was invited to give a lecture on how the course
was helpful to their career. This created a link to past programs
and also motivated participants to become that key participant
for future courses. Building on other courses - the work and
final product of these courses - often built upon the work of the
previous courses. This allowed the participants to feel as if they
are part of a larger movement and that their course was not an
isolated “one-off” course. For example, in the case study
mentioned earlier the participants used technology to create the
documentation for the left aisle of Santa Cecilia. In the
following years the right aisle was documented and then during
another course the tombs on the floor were the focus. This has
led to a greater “product” rather than the one that only a single
course could have created.
3.3 Innovations
Balance: During these technical training sessions there was
always a balance sought between lectures, field exercises and
technology laboratory exercises. Any one of the previous would
overtax an individual. This balance was carefully monitored
during the on-going course evaluations and adjusted
accordingly. This was also reflected in the schedule as there
were built-in flexibilities in the schedule that allowed for the
readjustment of this balance. Many of the instructors were
asked to prepare their material to either be lectures or exercises.
There was also additional time scheduled that was adjusted to a
lecture overrun or discussion or demonstration. Several
“floating” demonstrations and exercises were prepared in
advance to maintain this balance. For example, an exercise on
aerial balloon photography was prepared in advance and was
ready for when the lecture/exercise/lab ratio was out of balance.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 112

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

When the coordinators felt this was the case an additional 20
minutes was set aside to carry out this exercise. This provided
an element of surprise and generated enthusiasm during a
particularly difficult or long series of lectures or lab processing
work.
Social Activities: Technical training courses were observed to
succeed most often when the participants were comfortable
with each other and relaxed and able to openly ask questions to
each other and to the coordinators or instructors. This was very
difficult during short courses of only four weeks or less.
Therefore planned social activities were an essential component
of these courses. Not only was this an important component but
when these activities occurred was also important. A social
activity was always planned at the beginning of the course. This
allowed the participants to get to know one another and the
coordinators and first instructors in a social setting away from
the stress of technical training sessions. This was a formal
opening, but the participants were also encouraged to form their
own social activities during the course. One such participant led
social activity was an intercultural dinner where each
participant brought a special “dish” from their own home
countries. Finally a formal closing social session was held and
official representatives from their home countries were invited
to recognize their achievements.

during one course at the half way point of the training program
many of the participants provided feedback that they were
afraid that they were not getting to know their fellow
participants sufficiently. The coordinators evaluated this and
decided to host an additional social event in the form of a pizza
party. This was well received and achieved in rebalancing the
course. These surveys were originally conducted by paper
survey but then the online survey tool SurveyMonkey was used.
It was important that these surveys were very short with no
more than 20 questions that could be completed in 10 minutes.
It was attempted to have the same evaluation form for different
courses to compare across courses but this proved to be too
difficult as the courses and content were constantly changing
and were specifically adapted to each group of participants as
well as improved following past participants feedback.
Final Evaluation: The final evaluation after the course was
exactly the same questions as the pre-evaluation before the
course. This allowed one-to-one comparisons to questions and
knowledge before the course began. This was very helpful to
the coordinators as a tool for future funding and proving
success. 100% of all participants evaluated the courses and
clearly stated that their technological abilities had improved.
This was not too surprising given that they were just finishing
the course.

Volunteer Sessions: Many of the participants arrived from one
side of the Digital Divide where their technical knowledge base
was much higher than others. With such a mixed international
group if the course was directed toward those with more
knowledge those from less fortunate countries would have been
´lost´ and vice versa, if the course material is mainly directed
toward less fortunate individuals then the participants from
more advanced countries would quickly become bored. This
was remedied in two ways. First, the participants were informed
about their responsibility also to be instructors and share their
knowledge; and secondly, volunteer sessions were conducted.
These sessions were organized externally after hours, during the
evenings or on the weekends in order to give the more advanced
participants an opportunity to exercise their greater technical
interests and skills. For example, during one training session a
voluntary excursion was at night to allow the participants to
learn about night photography and artificial lighting
technologies. This gave an outlet for coordinators and provided
the excuse that the advanced participants could not state the
course was insufficiently advanced because they were given the
opportunity to have more technically oriented sessions.
4. POST COURSE

Figure 5. Evaluation sample from the ICCROM-GCI training
course ARIS 2009

4.1 Evaluation

4.2 Follow-up

Pre-Course Evaluation: Constant evaluations were conducted
to ensure that course coordination was on track. The first
evaluation was required before the participants arrived at the
training location. This provided a base level information on
what the participant knew, what they were interested in and
what their expectations were for the course.

However the evaluations did not stop there, after one year the
same evaluations were sent via email to the participants with an
over 90% response rate. Even after one year the participants
stated that the courses helped in improving their technical
abilities and contributed toward improving documentation of
cultural heritage places in their countries. Finally, an important
aspect of the evaluation was the division between evaluating
instructors, content and course coordination. This was
extremely important because the coordinators wanted to
understand if it was the content that was successful (or
unsuccessful) or if the success was the instructor delivery or
coordination.

On-going Evaluations: Participants were also evaluated every
Friday about the work of the week. This gave coordinators the
opportunity to discuss the shortcomings of the week and
suggestions by the participants over the weekend. Then
adjustments were made and the participants were informed of
the results during the following Monday morning. For example,

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 113

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

5. CONCLUSIONS
5.1 Results
In over 10 years and 28 training courses approximately 250
mid-career professionals were trained to use technology tools
for the documentation of cultural heritage places around the
world. These individuals included architects, planners,
engineers, museum curators, conservators and other
backgrounds. They came to the training courses with different
levels of technical education but with the same goal of
improving their knowledge of these tools in order to enhance
conservation practice in their countries. Many of them had
difficulty using basic graphic editing tools while, in the same
course, there were participants attending who had advanced
degrees and in some cases PhD with high levels of technical
training.
Using the teaching methodology and techniques described
earlier the goal was to improve technical ability and familiarity
with new documentation tools in order to provide participants
with a general overview of the field and some practice on the
main tools available, so as to improve the conservation of
cultural heritage places.
This paper is therefore the result of the development of a
methodology to address this wide gap between technical
education and the specific field of documentation for cultural
heritage preservation. This methodology is still evolving and
constantly being adapted as required by the subject itself.
Technology is rapidly changing and the course materials and
methods must also change and adapt. This is due to many new
disruptive technologies such as the advancement of integrated
devices, for example, the combination of GPS and cameras into
smartphones or tablets. This often renders specific training
useless unless these new options are taken into account,
analysed and assessed for our specific documentation goals.
The authors and coordinators of these courses feel that almost
all participants benefited from the course experience. This is
evidenced by the continuing strong network with more than
90% of the participants still in contact after more than ten years,
the evaluation feedback and through the continued sources of
funding to carry out these courses.

Australia ICOMOS, 1999. The Burra Charter – the Australia
ICOMOS Charter for Places of Cultural Significance
Chen, W., Wellman, B., 2004. The Global Digital Divide Within and Between Countries. IT & Society, vol. 1, issue 7,
spring/summer pp. 39-45
Clark, K., 2001. Informed Conservation, Understanding
historic buildings and their landscapes for conservation.
English Heritage
Eppich, R., Chabbi, A. (eds.), 2007. Illustrated Examples,
Recording and Documentation for the Conservation of Heritage
Places for Conservation, J. Paul Getty Trust, Donhead, 2011
second edition
Eppich, R., Hadzic, L., 2013. Heritage Conservation – Aligning
Technologies, CICOP International Conference
Letellier, R., 2001. “Bridging the Gap” Between the
Information User and the Information Provider. Working
Group report CIPA Conference Potsdam
Letellier, R., 2004. Strategic Alliances as seen by ICOMOS and
Information Users, ISPRS CIPA Special Session, Istanbul
Letellier, R., LeBlanc, F., 2007. Guiding Principles, Recording
Documentation and Information Management for the
Conservation of Heritage Places, J. Paul Getty Trust, Donhead,
2011 second edition
ICCROM, GCI Newsletters on the ARIS courses. Websites of
institutions sponsoring training programs: www.iccrom.org,
www.getty.edu, www.tecnalia.com, www.laac.csic.es
Rogers, E., 2001. The Digital Divide. Convergence, vol. 7 no. 4
pp. 96-111
Smith, J., 1978. The Scope of Heritage Conservation,
Conservation Technology Manuals, Bulletin of the Association
for Preservation Technology, Vol.10, No. 3, pp.33-38

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the following
institutions that made possible these training experiences over
the last 10 years: ICCROM in Rome (Italy); ICCROM-ATHAR
Regional Conservation Centre in Sharjah (UAE); Raymond
Lemaire International Centre for Conservation, KU Leuven
(Belgium); Tecnalia Research & Innovation in the Basque
Country (Spain); Escuela de Estudios Árabes-CSIC in Granada
(Spain); The Getty Conservation Institute in Los Angeles
(USA); World Monuments Fund, Cultural Heritage without
Borders in Sarajevo (Bosnia and Herzegovina), as well as all
the participants and their respective institutions that throughout
these 10 years were trained during these courses.

Figure 6 and 7. Training in the use of GIS during the GCIWMF training initiative in Jordan in 2005 (left) and during the
ICCROM-GCI ARIS Course in 2007 (right)
6. REFERENCES
Almagro Vidal, A., 2005. Training on Documentation in
Architectural Heritage: The Experience of ARIS and CLADIC
Courses. CIPA XX International Symposium in Turin

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 114

