View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk

brought to you by

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada

CULTURAL HERITAGE IN SMART CITY ENVIRONMENTS
M. Angelidoua, E. Karachalioua T. Angelidoua, E. Stylianidisa
a School

of Spatial Planning and Development, Faculty of Engineering, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece
mangel@auth.gr; ekaracha@auth.gr; angelidoutatiana@gmail.com; sstyl@auth.gr

Commission II

KEY WORDS: Smart city, strategy, application, urban development, touristic development, cultural heritage management

ABSTRACT:
This paper investigates how the historical and cultural heritage of cities is and can be underpinned by means of smart city tools,
solutions and applications. Smart cities stand for a conceptual technology-and-innovation driven urban development model. By
becoming ‘smart’, cities seek to achieve prosperity, effectiveness and competitiveness on multiple socio-economic levels. Although
cultural heritage is one of the many issues addressed by existing smart city strategies, and despite the documented bilateral benefits,
our research about the positioning of urban cultural heritage within three smart city strategies (Barcelona, Amsterdam, and London)
reveals fragmented approaches. Our findings suggest that the objective of cultural heritage promotion is not substantially addressed in
the investigated smart city strategies. Nevertheless, we observe that cultural heritage management can be incorporated in several
different strategic areas of the smart city, reflecting different lines of thinking and serving an array of goals, depending on the case. We
conclude that although potential applications and approaches abound, cultural heritage currently stands for a mostly unexploited asset,
presenting multiple integration opportunities within smart city contexts. We prompt for further research into bridging the two
disciplines and exploiting a variety of use cases with the purpose of enriching the current knowledge base at the intersection of cultural
heritage and smart cities.
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, increasing urbanisation along with a rapid
population growth in major modern cities have been impacting
the quality of citizens’ life at technical, social, economic and
organisational level. Smart city initiatives along with
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
integration aim to advance traditional networks while
providing efficient services and public benefits urban dwellers.
While we observe that the smart city literature variably sets
forth the objectives of cultural advancement, touristic
development and heritage preservation, research into the
specificities of the relationship between urban ‘smartness’ and
cultural heritage remains limited. In addition, there is no
complete review of smart city applications used in the domain
of cultural heritage worldwide. Addressing this research gap,
in this paper we aim to examine how the historical and cultural
heritage of cities is and can be underpinned by means of smart
city tools, solutions and applications.
2. CULTURAL HERITAGE IN SMART CITY
ENVIRONMENTS
2.1 Literature review and state of play
According to UNESCO’s universally accepted definition, the
term “Cultural Heritage” refers to several main categories of
heritage (UNESCO, 2016): (i) Tangible cultural heritage:
movable cultural heritage (paintings, sculptures, coins,
manuscripts), immovable cultural heritage (monuments,
archaeological sites, and so on), underwater cultural heritage
(shipwrecks, underwater ruins and cities), (ii) Intangible
cultural heritage: oral traditions, performing arts, rituals and

(iii) Natural heritage: natural sites with cultural aspects such as
cultural landscapes, physical, biological or geological
formations. The majority of the above types of cultural
heritage can be found in the complex of a city and in many
cases they are called to coexist and be integrated in the
contemporary structures of modern cities and their
technological advances. Moreover, cultural heritage represents
a domain where sustainability of interventions, people
gratification, promotion and preservation of spaces and
artworks have to be considered in total and at the same time
(Chianese et al, 2015).
Smart cities, on the other hand, are urban settlements that make
a conscious effort to capitalise on the new ICT landscape in a
strategic way, seeking to achieve prosperity, effectiveness and
competitiveness on multiple socio-economic levels
(Angelidou, 2014). The concept of the smart city emerged
recently and is constantly being transformed by contemporary
technological and economic trends and ongoing discussions.
One of the distinctive characteristics of smart cities is the
central role of technology as a means for accumulating,
organising and making vast amounts of information accessible
to an increasing number of people (Angelidou, 2016). This
results to a technologically-enabled ecosystem which yields
improvements on the city’s functions, enhancing
environmental sustainability and rendering the city ‘smart’
(Allwinkle and Cruickshank, 2011; Angelidou, 2015; Caragliu
et al., 2009; Tranos and Gertner, 2012).
It is worthy of mention here that many smart city scholars
emphasise that smart city strategies should be adapted to local
needs and development priorities, building on existing assets
of the city and the identity of place (Angelidou, 2014;
Paskaleva, 2011; Kitchin, 2015; Schulte, 2012). What is more,

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-27-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License.

27

CORE

provided by Crossref

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada

local tangible and intangible assets can be highlighted and
promoted through those strategies, enabling cities to capitalise
on their competitive advantage to become more attractive to
people, tourists and businesses (Giffinger et al., 2007). In this
sense, one-size-fits-all solutions are to be avoided in the
context of smart cities. Rather, customised approaches should
be adopted, depending on the specific situation.
Vattano (2014) asserts that the integration of a city’s historical
elements into its modern reality is a significant factor towards
the advancement of its urban intelligence. The specific benefits
of including cultural heritage in a smart city initiative derive
from big data management and augmented reality (AR). Big
data management allow to store and administer great amounts
of data, beneficial for the preservation of cultural heritage, and
the sustainable monitoring of its life cycle conservation.
Meanwhile, optimising technological use in cultural heritage
management leads to cost reduction in terms of maintenance.
Further, smart city initiatives could advance cultural heritage
ontologies with AR characteristics allowing both citizens and
visitors to readily access their historical value.

aiming to simultaneously advance the city’s natural and
cultural heritage and safety and security in urban spaces
(Schaffers, 2011). For the city of Gold Coast (popular tourist
city in Queensland, Australia) which received an IBM Smarter
Cities Challenge Grant, Bajracharya et al. (2014) propose that
the preservation and promotion of cultural and natural
amenities should be a priority of the smart city strategy. None
of the previous approaches, however, is backed by clearly
defined objectives, processes and tools to enhance cultural
heritage through the smart city route.
Altogether we see that cultural heritage is inarguably a priority
domain of urban development policy, including smart city
development. Nevertheless, there is lack of an in-depth
definition of the strategic relationship between urban
‘smartness’ and cultural heritage, as well as lack of clarity with
respect to the included objectives, processes, and results.
2.2 A research into how cultural heritage objectives have
been incorporated in existing smart city ventures initiative
2.2.1 Research design

Despite the abovementioned benefits, and although cultural
heritage is one of the many issues addressed by existing smart
city strategies, this takes place in an abstract and fragmented
way. For example, according to Bélissent (2010), the vision of
what kind of smart city is desired could be inspired from
different ideas: cities might envision becoming a business hub,
a tourist and heritage destination, or a manufacturing or retail
centre. Hollands (2008) observes that ICTs lie at the core of
the smart city idea, as they undergird networked infrastructures
to improve economic and political efficiency and enable
social, cultural and urban development. Amato et al. (2012)
describe a platform, tool and possible functionalities for
incorporating smart city technologies in the cultural heritage
domain. Chianese et al. (2015) propose a smart cultural
heritage architecture and platform for enhancing user
experience in cultural heritage sites. Similarly, Jara et al.
(2015) put forth an Internet of Things (IoT) function
architecture for smart towns. Garau (2014) describes a
platform that is fed through bottom-up input to aggregate,
inform, and suggest cultural heritage points of interest and
paths in the Region of Sardinia, Italy. Overall, we observe that
although occasionally important work has been done,
especially in the field of user experience and process
architecture, the available literature on the overall strategic
relationship between cultural heritage and smart cities remains
limited and abstract.
The situation is not very different in practice. In analysing 61
applications from 33 smart cities in different parts of the world,
Zubizarreta et al. (2015), found that although an abundance of
smart city applications is used in local smart city strategies,
most of them function as standalone tools, rather than
collectively contributing to an integrated vision towards
sustainable local development. In terms of existing smart city
strategies, one of the major objectives of London’s smart city
strategy is to be a world-class city in the fields of commerce
and culture (Greater London Authority, 2013); in the smart
city strategy of Barcelona, technology is seen –among othersas an enabler for universal access to culture and education
(Ajuntament de Barcelona, 2014); with respect to the smart
city applications in the Amsterdam Smart city initiative, Lee
and Gong Hancock (2012) found that smart city applications
in the category ‘tourism/culture/sports/leisure’ count for the
26% of the smart city services portfolio. The City of Genova,
Italy has created the Smart Museum and Park arena platform,

Inspired by the above situation, in this paper we examine how
the historical and cultural heritage of cities has been
incorporated in existing smart city strategies so far. The
methodology we use is ‘cross-case analysis’ (Yin, 2003),
whereby selected information is collected across selected cases
and then analysed comparatively in order to identify
underlying trends, patterns and relationships, allowing for the
extraction of theoretical propositions (Eisenhardt, 1989).
In this paper, we present three European smart city initiatives
which have variably addressed the issue of cultural heritage.
These include the strategies of Barcelona, Amsterdam and
London. The factors that drove our selection are (i) the
existence of a ‘cultural heritage’ component within the
strategy (be it subtle or pronounced), (ii) the maturity of the
initiatives, which is a precondition for being able to acquire the
necessary data and (iii) the availability of information through
academic and government publications (academic journal and
conference papers, theses and research reports, policy
documents).
For each case (Barcelona, Amsterdam, and London) we
collected information about:
-

the scope and structure of the smart city initiative
the specific objectives of cultural heritage promotion
within the smart city initiative and
the particular smart city applications related to
cultural heritage which are deployed in the context
of the smart city strategy under examination

The collected data were arranged in a tabular display, which
features the above information per each case (Table 1). On the
basis of this display, the collected information was scanned
vertically and horizontally to uncover underlying patterns.
2.2.2 Field research
In the following we briefly describe the three selected cases
studies for our research, which are the smart city strategies of
Barcelona, Amsterdam, and London. For each case we provide
a brief description of the strategy’s approach and structure, as
well as the positioning of cultural heritage as a theme within
the strategy.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-27-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License.

28

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada

Smart London (United Kingdom), is a smart city initiative that
began in 2013 with the formation of the Smart London Board
and the release of the Smart London Plan (Anthopoulos, 2017;
Goh, 2015; Greater London Authority, 2013, 2016; Smart
London official website, 2017). The Smart London initiative
is structured upon seven strategic priorities: (i) put Londoners
at the core, (ii) provide access to open data, (iii) leverage
London’s research, technology, and creative talent, (iv)
collaboration networks, (v) enable London to adapt and grow,
(vi) enable City Hall to better serve Londoners’ needs, (vii)
offer a ‘smarter’ experience for all. In the strategy it is
recognized that London is already a vibrant, international and
cosmopolitan business and tourist hub, one of the most
significant centres of creativity and culture globally -for this
reason the entire strategy is focused on upgrading and
enforcing these qualities. Measures loosely connected with
cultural heritage promotion can be found under the initiatives
(vi) and (vii). It can be argued that, in general lines, the
promotion of London’s cultural heritage in the context of its
smart city strategy is primarily seen as a service to citizens and

Our findings per each case are presented in the following table
(Table 1). The table features the cases in three corresponding
lines and the collected data for each one of them in three
columns.
Case/
Data

Barcelona

Amsterdam smart city (the Netherlands) is a partnership
among businesses, authorities, research institutions, and the
people of Amsterdam to reduce CO2 emissions and improve
the environmental record of the city (Amsterdam Smart City
official website, 2017; Angelidou, 2016; Lee and Gong
Hancock, 2012; Mora and Bolici, 2017). In this strategy, the
city is seen as an open platform for experimentation. Smart city
products and services are user centric, altogether contributing
to the development of more liveable urban environments.
More particularly, the majority of the included projects are
targeted towards informing citizens, entrepreneurs and the
public sector about their energy consumption and educating
them about how to manage it more prudently. Currently the
program comprises an array of projects that present innovative
ideas and new business models across Amsterdam’s
neighbourhoods. These projects fall within six thematic areas:
(i) infrastructure and technology, (ii) energy, water and waste,
(iii) mobility, (iv) circular city, (v) governance and education,
(vi) citizens and living. The projects are initially tested on a
small scale and the ones that prove to be effective are
subsequently extended to larger areas. In Amsterdam’s
strategy, cultural heritage, manifested through the city’s
canals, monuments and traditional residential areas, is
addressed as a component of urban liveability and quality of
life (Amsterdam Smart City official website, 2017).

visitors, integrated with other smart city services such as city
hall services and smart mobility around the city.

Smart city
initiative
architecture

Sector based:
(i) smart mobility,
(ii) public and
social services,
(iii) environment,
(iv) companies
and business,
(v) research and
innovation, (vi)
communications,
(vii)
infrastructures,
(viii) tourism, (ix)
citizen
cooperation and
(x) international
projects

Sector based: (i)
infrastructure and
technology, (ii)
energy, water and
waste, (iii)
mobility, (iv)
circular city, (v)
governance and
education, (vi)
citizens and living
Amsterdam

Barcelona’s Smart City strategy (Spain) is structured upon
three pillars: ‘international promotion’, ‘international
collaboration’ and ‘local projects’. The strategy has a global
outlook, seeking to forge an open environment for the
collaboration among government, industry, academia and
citizens (Ajuntament de Barcelona, 2013; Angelidou, 2016;
Bakici et al., 2012; Barcelona Smart City official website,
2017; Mora and Bolici, 2015). Smart city applications can be
found in the areas of (i) smart mobility, (ii) public and social
services, (iii) environment, (iv) companies and business, (v)
research and innovation, (vi) communications, (vii)
infrastructures, (viii) tourism, (ix) citizen cooperation and (x)
international projects. Each one of the previous includes a
number of smart city programmes and projects, such as the
‘City Operation System’, the ‘Smart City Campus’, ‘Smart
Lighting’, ‘Smart Urban Mobility’ and so on -the number of
local projects is more than 100. In this strategy, among others,
technology is seen as an enabler of culture, education and
healthcare (Ajuntament de Barcelona, 2014).

Objectives
of cultural
heritage
promotion
within
smart city
initiative
Cultural
heritage
promotion is
regarded as
a touristic
developmen
t
component.
The
objective is
to preserve
and promote
cultural
heritage as a
means to
improve the
touristic
product of
the city,
attract more
visitors and
offer a rich
cultural
experience
for all
Cultural
heritage
promotion is
regarded as
a quality of
life
component.
The
objective is
to preserve
and promote
cultural
heritage as a
means to
improve the
quality of
life and
forge
liveable
urban
environment
s that invite
people to
use and
‘own’ them.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-27-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License.

Smart city
application
s related to
cultural
heritage

- interactive
tourist
attractions
maps
- agendas of
cultural
events
- smart
mobility
applications
/journey
planner

participator
y urban
planning
and codesign of
public
spaces
(including
neighbourho
od based
initiatives)
- citizendriven
innovation
(mainly
participator
y sensing
for
environment
al
monitoring)
- an ‘Urban
guide’ to
pinpoint and
communicat
e points of

29

London

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada

Strategic priority
based: (i) put
Londoners at the
core, (ii) provide
access to open
data, (iii) leverage
London’s
research,
technology, and
creative talent,
(iv) collaboration
networks, (v)
enable London to
adapt and grow,
(vi) enable City
Hall to better
serve Londoners’
needs, (vii) offer a
‘smarter’
experience for all.

Cultural
heritage
promotion is
regarded as
part of city
hall services
to citizens
and visitors.
The
objective is
to offer an
inclusive
‘smart
London’
experience
to all -one
which will
be
responsive
to citizen
and visitors’
needs,
offering
integrated
services
across a
number of
functional
areas, such
as cultural
heritage
promotion,
transport
and
collaborativ
e
governance.

interest is
under
developmen
t
collaborativ
e urban
planning
and policy
making
- integrated
wayfinding
navigation
system
(journey
planner)
including
points of
interest
- clean
streets
application

Table 1. Tabular display with field research findings across the
three cases (authors’ elaboration)
2.2.3 Analysis of findings
The first overarching observation is that cultural heritage
preservation and promotion can be regarded as a
differentiating component among smart city strategies,
reflecting different lines of thinking and serving different
goals. In particular, in Barcelona’s strategy it is seen as a
touristic development component; in Amsterdam’s strategy it
is regarded as a quality of life component; and in London’s
strategy it is regarded as a public service component. These
three different approaches denote the different positioning of
cultural heritage in the context of technology led urban
development and the diverging roles that it can acquire
towards local urban and social development. This fact carries
contextual, management and technical implications about the
integration of cultural heritage development within smart
cities, which call for different courses of action depending on
the case.

driven development, accessibility to services and quality of life
are horizontally present throughout the examined smart city
strategies, cultural heritage promotion as an objective is not
particularly pronounced in any of them. This comes as a
surprise, given that all three of the examined cities are places
endowed with rich history, vibrant culture and abundant points
of historical interest, which could play a major role towards
the enhancement of urban intelligence. In this sense, one
would expect that –at least for these cities- cultural heritage
would be used as an overarching asset upon which smart city
approaches would be built, capitalizing on the multifaceted
roles that it can play towards enhancing urban innovation,
liveability and socio-economic prosperity. Yet it seems that the
focus of smart cities tends to be geared towards more
‘fashionable’ trends of thinking about urban development,
such as liveability, inclusivity, accessibility and openness, and
cultural heritage is regarded as one of the many low-tier
components that could contribute to these objectives.
A third remark to be made regards the specific smart city
applications which are included in the strategies and pertain to
the cultural heritage preservation and promotion objective. We
observe an absence of smart city applications referring to
cultural heritage per se. Instead, the included applications have
a broader focus and attempt to integrate elements of cultural
heritage within a broader system of information and services
provision. For example, cultural points of interest are
integrated, along with other leisure and commercial
attractions, in tourist maps and agendas, or within wayfinding
applications and journey planners. There is also an array of
smart city applications that are not directly related to cultural
heritage itself, but can be regarded as external facilitators of
cultural heritage promotion. Typical examples include
collaborative (neighbourhood) city making and urban planning
applications and citizen reporting platforms.
After the above analysis, one could argue that in general lines
smart cities fail to successfully incorporate the component of
cultural heritage within smart cities and the vision towards
long term, innovation and sustainability-led urban
development. Although potential applications and approaches
abound, cultural heritage currently stands for a mostly
unexploited
asset,
presenting
multiple
integration
opportunities within smart city contexts. Most of these
opportunities are currently bypassed. In this paper we made a
first step towards mitigating this weakness, highlighting both
the specific benefits of including cultural heritage in smart city
initiatives, and several different pathways to be pursued to this
end.
3. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we investigated the ways in which cultural
heritage is and can be incorporated in smart city strategies. To
this end, we examined three smart city strategies of large
European cities, specifically focusing our attention into the
positioning of the cultural heritage theme within the smart city
strategy, and further by investigating whether smart city
applications related to cultural heritage management exist
therein. Our findings revealed that cultural heritage is not
systematically exploited and formally incorporated in smart
city initiatives, despite the fact that it offers and array of
opportunities for smart city development, while significant
technological advancements have taken place in the cultural
heritage domain in recent years, as well.

Another important observation to be made is that, although
themes such as cultural, touristic, creativity and innovation

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-27-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License.

30

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada

Another general observation emerging from our research is
that there seems to be an integration gap between overarching
smart city solutions and site-based cultural heritage
preservation and promotion applications. Although both areas
are currently entering a phase of maturity, and share (at least
some) common concerns, they have not worked in consort so
far. It is also possible that research at the intersection of smart
cities and cultural heritage might have more to benefit by
focusing on different types of cases and methods. For example,
there might be smaller historical cities that could showcase
more advanced smart city solutions in the areas of cultural
heritage preservation and promotion, given that they will
typically encompass narrower economies and be more focused
toward touristic driven development.
The above observations and findings contribute to a deeper
understanding of how local cultural heritage can be
strategically underpinned through the smart city approach, and
namely the positioning of the cultural heritage preservation
and promotion objective in the smart city context, and which
tools and applications are available to this end. Using these
results, policy makers, researchers and developers can create
more documented, targeted and informed strategies and tools
towards incorporating cultural heritage objectives in
technology-led urban development.

Bajracharya, B., Cattell, D. and Khanjanasthiti, I., 2014.
Challenges and Opportunities to Develop a Smart City: A Case
Study of Gold Coast, Australia. REAL CORP 2014, 21-23
May 2014, Vienna, Austria.
Bakici, T., Almirall, E., and Wareham, J., 2012. A Smart City
Initiative: the Case of Barcelona. Journal of the knowledge
economy. Special Issue: Smart Cities and the Future Internet
in Europe, pp. 135-148.
Barcelona Smart City official website, 2017. Available:
http://smartcity.bcn.cat/en/
Bélissent, J., 2012. Governments Embrace New Modes Of
Constituent Engagement; Social Media, Mobility, And Open
Data Transform eGovernment. Forrester for CIOs: Forrester.
Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C., and Nijkamp, P., 2009. Smart Cities
in Europe. Serie Research Memoranda 0048 (VU University
Amsterdam, Faculty of Economics, Business Administration
and Econometrics).
Chianese, A., Piccialli, F., and Valente, I., 2015. Smart
environments and cultural heritage: a novel approach to create
intelligent cultural spaces. Journal of Location Based Services,
9(3), pp. 209-234.

REFERENCES
Ajuntament de Barcelona, 2012. Barcelona urban habitat: The
vision, approach, and projects of the City of Barcelona towards
smart cities (presentation by L. Olivella), Smart City Summit
2012, 2 July, Milano.
Available:http://www.theinnovationgroup.it/wpcontent/uploa
ds/2012/05/Olivella_City-of-Barcelona.pdf
Ajuntament de Barcelona, 2013. Barcelona Smart City; The
vision, focus and projects of the City of Barcelona in the
context of Smart Cities.
Available:http://www.slideshare.net/MicrosoftSuomi/citynext-smartbarcelona-28102013.
Allwinkle, S. and Cruickshank, P., 2011. Creating Smart-er
Cities: An Overview. Journal of Urban Technology, 18(2), pp.
1-16.
Amato, F., Chianese, A., Moscato, V., Picariello, A., and
Sperli, G., 2012. SNOPS: a smart environment for cultural
heritage applications. Twelfth ACM International Workshop
on Web information and data management, pp. 49-56.
Amsterdam Smart City official website, 2016. Available:
https://amsterdamsmartcity.com/

Eisenhardt, K. M., 1989. Building theories from case study
research. Academy of management review, 14(4), pp. 532-550.
Garau, C., 2014. Smart paths for advanced management of
cultural heritage. Regional Studies, Regional Science, 1(1), pp.
286-293.
Giffinger, R., Fertner, C., Kramar, H., Kalasek, R., PichlerMilanović, N., and Meijers, E., 2007. Smart cities; Ranking of
European medium-sized cities (final report): Vienna
University of Technology, University of Ljubljana, Delft
University of Technology.
Goh, K., 2015. Who’s Smart? Whose City? The Sociopolitics
of Urban Intelligence. In Planning Support Systems and Smart
Cities, Springer, pp. 169-187.
Greater London Authority. 2016. The future of smart:
Harnessing digital innovation to make London the best city in
the world (update report of the Smart London Plan 2013).
Available: https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/businessand-economy/science-and-technology/smart-london/futuresmart

Angelidou, M., 2016. Four European Smart City Strategies.
International Journal of Social Science Studies, 4, pp.18-30

Greater London Authority, 2013. Smart London Plan.
Available:
https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/smart_london_
plan.pdf

Angelidou, M., 2015. Smart Cities: a conjuncture of four
forces. Cities, 47, pp. 95–106.

Hollands, R. G., 2008. Will the real smart city please stand up?
City, 12(3), pp. 303-320.

Angelidou, M., 2014. Smart city policies: A spatial approach.
Cities, 41, pp. S3-S11.

Jara, A. J., Sun, Y., Song, H., Bie, R., Genooud, D., and
Bocchi, Y., 2015. Internet of Things for cultural heritage of
smart cities and smart regions. 29th International Conference
on Advanced Information Networking and Applications
Workshops, pp. 668-675.

Anthopoulos, L., 2017. Smart utopia VS smart reality:
Learning by experience from 10 smart city cases. Cities, 63,
pp. 128-148.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-27-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License.

31

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada

Kitchin, R., 2015. Making sense of smart cities: addressing
present shortcomings. Cambridge Journal of Regions,
Economy and Society, 8, pp. 131-136.
Lee, J.-H., and Gong Hancock, M., 2012. Toward a framework
for Smart Cities: A Comparison of Seoul, San Francisco and
Amsterdam. Innovations for Smart Green City. What’s
Working, What’s Not and What’s Next, 26-27 June 2012,
Stanford.
Available:
http://fsi.stanford.edu/events/innovations_for_smart_green_ci
ty_whats_working_whats_not_and_whats_next/
Mora, L., and Bolici, R., 2017. How to Become a Smart City:
Learning from Amsterdam. Smart and Sustainable Planning
for Cities and Regions, Springer, pp. 251-266.
Paskaleva, K. A., 2011. The smart city: A nexus for open
innovation? Intelligent Buildings International, 3(3), pp. 153171.
Schaffers, H., Komninos, N., Pallot, M., Trousse, B., Nilsson,
M. and Oliveira, A., 2011. Smart Cities and the Future
Internet: Towards Cooperation Frameworks for Open
Innovation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer.
Schulte, M. A., 2012. IDC Smart Cities Benchmark;
Deutschland 2012 (in german): IDC. Available:
https://www.karlsruhe.de/b2/wirtschaftsstandort/rankings/sta
edteranking/HF_sections/content/ZZjZJCvt1QmCTK/ZZkzT
HI8aXhrBV/IDC
Smart Cities Benchmark - Zusammenfassung für Städte und
Gemeinden.pdf Smart London official website, 2017.
Available: https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/businessand-economy/science-and-technology/smart-london
Tranos, E., and Gertner, D., 2012. Smart networked cities? The
European Journal of Social Science Research, 25(2), pp. 175190.
UNESCO, 2017. What is meant by "cultural heritage"?
Available:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/illicittrafficking-of-cultural-property/unesco-database-of-nationalcultural-heritage-laws/frequently-asked-questions/definitionof-the-cultural-heritage/
Vattano, S., 2014. Smart Technology for smart regeneration of
cultural heritage. Italian smart cities in comparison. In
MWF2014: Museums and the Web Florence.
Available: http://mwf2014.museumsandtheweb.com
Yin, R., 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods (3rd
edition ed.). London: SAGE Publications.
Zubizarreta, I., Seravalli, A., and Arrizabalaga, S., 2015. Smart
city concept: What it is and what it should be. Journal of
Urban Planning and Development, 142(1).

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-27-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License.

32

