Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Cultural Heritage in Role-Playing
Video Games: A Map of Approaches
Jakub Majewski
Furnace journal, issue 2

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

T he Pot ent ial for Modding Communit ies in Cult ural Herit age
Jakub Majewski
T he Int eract ive Past : Archaeology, Herit age & Video Games
Csilla Ariese, Aris Polit opoulos, Angus Mol
Oldest Cult ure, Newest Medium: What Emerges from t he Clash?
Jakub Majewski

ISSUE 2 (2015)

ISSN 2057-519X (Online)

CULTURAL HERITAGE IN ROLE-PLAYING VIDEO GAMES: A MAP OF APPROACHES
JAKUB MAJEWSKI
ABSTRACT

In recent years, considerable attention has been devoted to applying video game technology to the
development of virtual heritage tools. One noteworthy form of game is the role-playing game (RPG). RPGs
seek to immerse the player in a character within a specific imaginary world, usually based to some degree
on reality. RPGs can transmit cultural heritage, but the breadth and depth of engagement with culture
depend o the ga e’s fo us. This paper argues ga es i ol i g heritage a be divided into four
categories depending on their focus towards entertainment or non-entertainment, and emphasis on mass
market or small market appeal. Each category has different advantages and disadvantages from the
heritage perspective. Several RPGs and RPG-like games are examined across the four categories to
illustrate their different approaches to accuracy, detail, and accessibility.
Keywords: video games, virtual heritage, role-playing games, digital technology, edutainment

ISSUE 2 (2015)
Introduction

Virtual heritage, defined as the practice of creating virtual landscapes imbued with
heritage content and presented with digital media (Tan and Rahaman 2009: 144), has
emerged as a significant area of research and practical application within the greater
landscape of heritage studies (Tan and Rahaman 2009: 144-146). Within this field,
considerable attention has been devoted to the benefits of applying video game
technology to cultural heritage, particularly in relation to archaeological reconstruction
(Anderson et al. 2009), but also teaching languages and communicating other aspects
of intangible heritage such as local customs (Johnson 2010), history (Egenfeldt-Nielsen
2007: 119-130), and cultural knowledge (Leavy 2014).
Depending on who develops a video game, cultural heritage can either be a core
objective of the game or merely background material used to enhance the product.
Equally, games may be designed to appeal to as wide an audience as possible, or focus
on a particular small audience, perhaps allowing greater accuracy while sacrificing
popular appeal.
Based on these considerations, this paper presents a map of four different approaches
to cultural heritage in games:
1. Commercial games
2. Serious games
3. Culture-centric games
4. Player-developed modifications (mods)
These categories can be applied to all game genres. However, the examples explored
here are drawn mainly from the role-playing game (RPG) genre. Therefore, the paper
first discusses the nature of the RPG and its general applicability as a carrier of heritage.
Subsequently, the four basic approaches to cultural heritage in games are summarised.
Finally, each approach is examined individually with reference to particular games.
The role-playing game
RPGs as a game genre pre-date the video game, arising out of older traditions including
tabletop gaming, live-action role-playing, and Renaissance fairs (Barton 2008: 13-24).
In the RPG, the player character, or avatar, is a dynamic entity, often created by the
pla er, a d de elopi g u der the pla er’s o trol. Pla ers i pro e a d ustomize their
1

ISSUE 2 (2015)
avatars by managing their appearance and skills, as well as by obtaining and equipping
progressively better items (Barton 2008: 3-11; Hitchens and Drachen 2008).
To draw the player into the game, it is vital for an RPG to immerse the player in
character and place. To achieve immersion, a cohesive imaginary world must be built,
a process hinging on the three characteristics of inventiveness, consistency, and a sense
of completeness (Wolf 2012: 29-64). Champion (2006: 67-89) approaches worldbuilding from the perspective of presence, a concept introduced from the study of
virtual reality. He breaks presence down into three separate concepts, these being
environmental presence, cultural presence, and social presence (Champion 2007). The
closer RPGs o e to reati g a se se of ei g i a real pla e, ith real people a d
a

real

ulture, the greater the i

ersio . RPG makers, therefore, devote

considerable attention to culture (Monken 2010; Johnson 2013: 31-40). Current RPGs
still generally fall short of Cha pio ’s e h arks for a hie i g stro g prese e
(Champion 2007; Majewski 2014). Nonetheless, there is a definite correlation between
strong RPG worlds and strong exploration of culture.
While deep cultural information is desirable in commercial RPGs, cultural accuracy is
not intrinsically valuable. Developers frequently resort to popular culture stereotypes,
distorted ut readil re og iza le to audie es, a d thus

ore a essi le “ołt siak

2014). Conversely, effective transmission of cultural heritage relies not only on strong
cultural content but also on the appeal of the game. A game that explores culture in
depth and with accuracy while failing to meet audience expectations will not ultimately
be successful. This tension between accuracy and popularity leads cultural heritage
scholars and practitioners to explore avenues alternative to commercial games,
including so-called serious games as well as other, hybridised approaches.
Categorising approaches to cultural heritage in games
Broadly, four categories of games can be distinguished, emphasising either cultural
content or entertainment value, and appealing to mass markets or small markets.
Figure 1 depicts a map of these four approaches.

2

ISSUE 2 (2015)

Figure 1. A map of approaches to heritage in games (source: author)

Of the four categories, only commercial games and serious games can be considered
as completely distinct and independent categories, the former focusing entirely on
entertainment for a mass market, the latter on cultural education for a small market.
The remaining two categories should be considered as hybrid and dependent. Thus,
culture-centric games are serious games that adapt features from commercial games
to improve accessibility for the mass market; alternatively, they are commercial games
based on the notion that concentrating on cultural heritage in both game content and
game marketing will improve sales. Game mods, meanwhile, are simply additional
materials, produced by players, which can be plugged into a particular (usually
commercial) game. They exist in the context of that game and are driven by the
i terests of the ga e’s o

u it . These four ategories are o

re ie ed,

ith a

particular focus on RPGs dealing with historical and endangered cultures.
Commercial games

Commercial games are oriented to entertainment and mass market appeal. Cultural
heritage is used here to enhance the believability of the game world. This can apply
both to fantastic and realistic virtual worlds. An example of a fantastic world populated
with extensive references to a real culture is The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim (Bethesda
Softworks 2011). Though built on a layer of pre-Christian Scandinavian culture, and
depicting a recognisable Scandinavian landscape, Skyrim (Figure 2) modifies this culture
3

ISSUE 2 (2015)
extensively to fit into a fantasy world of dragons and magic. Johnson (2013: 41-59)
argues players are well aware of the historical influences in Skyrim, and are interested
in exploring this aspect of the game. Simultaneously, Skyrim has been criticised for
resorti g to ultural stereot pes “ołt siak

4 . Certai l , a ga e set i a fa tas

world has no need for strict cultural accuracy.

Figure 2. Scandinavia reimagined in The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim (source: author)
While not an RPG, the Assassi ’s Creed series (Ubisoft 2007-2015) is another
noteworthy example. Assassi ’s Creed is a science-fiction/fantasy story set ostensibly
in the real world. The series explores a number of different places and time periods, in
each case devoting significant attention to the cultural backdrop. While accuracy is still
sa rifi ed for the sake of the stor , Whitaker a d olleagues argue for the ga e’s alue
as an introduction to culture and history (Whitaker and Glass 2013; Whitaker and
Luther 2014; Whitaker and Andress 2015). Nonetheless, as an action game, Assassi ’s
Creed does not empower the player to explore its milieus in any great depth.
Some scholars have argued commercial developers should involve scholars in their
work in order to improve the accuracy of commercial games (Johnson 2013: 61-63;
“ołt siak

4 . Ho e er, there does ot appear to e a

i tri si

o

er ial e efit

to drive such an approach, making it unlikely to happen.

4

ISSUE 2 (2015)

Serious games

The challenge of cultural accuracy in commercial titles has led to games designed
specifically for accuracy and educational value. So-called serious games prioritise nonentertainment utility (Sawyer 2010) while still aiming to be enjoyable. Serious games
are used for many applications ranging from health and work to learning, training and
documentation (Sawyer and Smith 2008; Anderson et al. 2009).
Digital Songlines is an example of a serious game exploring cultural knowledge. The
project was a repository of Aboriginal cultural knowledge; thus, the entertainment
value was not as important as designing a culturally appropriate way of exploring
Aboriginal cultural and natural heritage. This was achieved by presenting data
integrated into the landscape, rather than catalogued in a database foreign to
Aboriginal knowledge practices (Leavy 2014: 88-109). An outgrowth of the Digital
Songlines project is Virtual Warrane II: Sacred Tracks of the Gadigal (Immersive
Heritage 2012). This project (Figure 3), designed for a museum exhibition about preEuropean Aboriginal culture in the Sydney area, best demonstrates the small-market
nature of the serious game, as Virtual Warrane II was only playable in one museum,
and only for the duration of the exhibition.

Figure 3. Aboriginal heritage in Virtual Warrane II: Sacred Tracks of the Gadigal (source:
Immersive Heritage 2012)
5

ISSUE 2 (2015)
Another noteworthy example is RezWorld (Thornton Media, Inc, unpublished), a game
designed to facilitate learning Native American languages, and built using technology
previously employed to train US soldiers in Iraqi Arab language and customs (Johnson
2010). In general, a strong tradition of cultural heritage-oriented serious games exists
(Anderson et al. 2009), but most efforts seem to focus on small audiences.
Culture-centric games
A separate category is commercial titles or serious games designed to imitate
commercial titles. Such games either explicitly explore cultural heritage or rely on
ultural heritage as a dra

fa tor to the poi t

here this e o es the ga e’s

ost

notable feature. This category constitutes a tension-filled combination of mass market
focus with an emphasis on cultural content. When a commercial game adapts this
approach, there is a risk that the narrower focus will limit the audience while budgetary
restrictions may not permit greater cultural depth. This is the case in Mount & Blade:
With Fire and Sword (Studio Sich, 2011), which depicts 17th century Eastern Europe
(Figure 4), but ultimately is unable to do so in any convincing depth (Majewski 2014:
133-135).

Figure 4. Polish-Lithuanian heritage in Mount & Blade: With Fire and Sword (source:
author)

6

ISSUE 2 (2015)
Academics or heritage-oriented organisations may also use this approach to reach a
wider audience. An example is World of Temasek (Magma Studios 2011), a multiplayer
online role-playing game depicting 14th century Singapore (Figure 5). Temasek was
partially funded by the National Heritage Board of Singapore (Lim 2012) and developed
in cooperation with academics (Wu and Jones 2010: 32) for use in classrooms, and for
general audiences. Though Temasek incorporates quests and dialogues for heritage
purposes (Wu & Jones 2010), its cultural depth remains limited, while its commerciallyinspired form still failed to capture a significant audience outside of the classroom.
Overall, the inherent tension between cultural themes and mass appeal results in
problems with culture, appeal, or both.

Figure 5. South-East Asian heritage in World of Temasek (source: Magma Studios 2011)

Game mods

The final category, game mods, demands a few words on the context and manner in
which game content can be modified (modded) by its users. Different games facilitate
modification to varying degrees, from the incorporation of new scenarios, characters
and spaces, to deep alterations of game rules. When a game warrants such interest,
players collaborate in what Gee (2013: 133-139) describes as the passionate affinity
7

ISSUE 2 (2015)
space (PAS). The PAS is usually an online space such as a discussion forum, where
diverse individuals gather to explore and build upon a common interest. The PAS serves
both to provide information and expertise to its visitors from other individuals, and as
an outlet for their productive efforts. A PAS can thus lead to the development of an
online repository of game-related knowledge, or to the creation of new game content
in the form of mods. Modding is also possible within an organised environment, and
culture-centric mods have been developed by school and university students as
coursework (Champion 2012: 115-146) or after-school activities (Squire 2011: 150161).
Player-de eloped ods thus e erge out of the pla ers’ i terests. Whe pla ers reate
culture-oriented mods, they do not necessarily do so not specifically to transmit
culture, but rather because they enjoy the process of modding. Nonetheless, the
players are exploring an area of interest, and their small market focus enables them to
devote considerable attention to cultural details. This attention to detail can be seen in
small mods designed to improve the cultural content already present in the original
game, as in the case of Csatádi's Visual and Historical Mod (Csatádi, 2011-2015) for
Mount & Blade: With Fire and Sword.
Mods are still awkward carriers of cultural heritage. They are constrained by a lack of
funding and the need to fit within the framework of a particular game not necessarily
optimal to that particular culture. This is evident in culture-oriented mods developed
for the RPG Mount & Blade: Warband (Taleworlds Entertainment 2010), including
Brytenwalda (Brytenwalda Team, 2011) and Suvarnabhumi Mahayuth (Rasiya Team
2012). Brytenwalda (Figure 6) is set in the cultural melting pot of 7th century Britain,
while the latter (Figure 7) examines 16th century South-East Asia.

8

ISSUE 2 (2015)

Figure 6. Hadrian's wall in Brytenwalda (source: author)

In both cases, limited funding can be discerned in the adaptation of existing graphical
assets, such as where Scandinavian-inspired architecture from Warband is re-textured
in Suvarnabhumi Mahayuth to approximate Thai architecture, a clear problem for
accuracy. Equall , i

oth ases the origi al ga e’s fo us o s all-scale battles and

feudal relations limits the range of cultural aspects the mods can address.

9

ISSUE 2 (2015)

Figure 7. A Nordic-inspired Palace poses as Thai architecture in Suvarnabhumi
Mahayuth (source: author)

Created within a game community, the target market of mods is limited, consisting of
the often-small subset of players interested in both the original game and the subject
ta kled

the od. Ho e er, i so e ases, the ga e’s pu lishers e po er odders

to officially publish the mod as a separate product, expanding its reach. A recent
example is Mount & Blade: Warband – Viking Conquest 2015), developed by the
Brytenwalda team (Savage 2014).
Conclusion

Using games to preserve and popularize cultural heritage is at once promising and
daunting. Each of the presented approaches carries with it specific limitations and
benefits. A culturally shallow or misleading, but entertaining commercial game, may
serve to bring public attention to a particular culture. Meanwhile, culture-centric
hybrids or serious games, have been used in education or in museums, but can suffer
from limited appeal when brought directly to the public.
Of the four approaches presented, the author would point to modding as a noteworthy
option for further exploration. Heritage scholars can potentially collaborate with
modders, harnessing their technical prowess to develop mods that enhance the
cultural content of an existing commercial game, or use new content to explore a
10

ISSUE 2 (2015)
different cultural setting within the framework of the original game. Such possibilities
are currently virtually unexamined.
However, all four approaches have their unique uses and capabilities, and none should
be neglected. What is clear is that the utility of video games in general and RPGs in
particular for cultural heritage is no longer a potential possibility. In fact, games are
already used for heritage in interesting and diverse ways, as well as making use of
heritage for their own purposes.

Jakub Majewski has more than a de ade’s e perie e of orki g i the video games
industry in a range of roles. In 2014, he began a PhD at Bond University, Gold Coast,
Australia researching the application of role-playing video games for individual
education and the transmission of cultural knowledge.
Contact: qmajewski@yahoo.co.uk

References
Anderson, E. F., McLoughlin, L., Liarokapis, F., Peters, C., Petridis, P., and de Freitas, S.
2009. Serious games in cultural heritage. Available online at:
https://www.academia.edu/191398/Serious_Games_in_Cultural_Heritage
Barton, M. 2008. Dungeons & Desktops. Wellesley: A K Peters, Ltd.
Champion, E. 2006. Evaluating cultural learning in virtual environments. PhD,
Melbourne: University of Melbourne.
Champion, E. 2007. Social Presence and Cultural Presence in Oblivion. Available online
at:
https://www.academia.edu/1003317/Social_Presence_and_Cultural_Presence_in_Ob
livion
Champion, E. 2012. Teaching Mods With Class. In E. Champion, E. (ed.). Game Mods:
Design, Theory, and Criticism. Pittsburgh: ETC Press. 113-146.
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, S. 2007. Educational Potential of Computer Games. New York:
Continuum.
Gee, J. P. 2013. Good Video Games + Good Learning. New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Hitchens, M., and Drachen, A. 2008. The Many Faces of Role-Playing Games.
International Journal of Role-Playing, 1. 3-21.
11

ISSUE 2 (2015)
Immersive Heritage. 2012. July 24. Virtual Warrane II - Sacred Tracks of the Gadigal.
Available online at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwM8t6vs-_c
Johnson, W. L. 2010. Serious Use of a Serious Game for Language Learning.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. 20. 175-195.
Johnson, E. 2013. Experienced Archaeologies: A mini-ethnography exploring the way
in which people engage with the past in single player role-playing video games.
Master’s thesis. York: The University of York.
Leavy, B. 2014. Australian Aboriginal Virtual Heritage. Master’s thesis, Bris a e:
Queensland University of Technology.
Lim, T. 2012. In Good Company: Magma Studios brings Cutting Edge Fun to History
and Learning. Available online at:
http://www.mda.gov.sg/Documents/Newsletter/Issue13/Pages/story6.aspx.html
Magma Studios 2011. World of Temasek: Screenshots. Available online at:
http://www.worldoftemasek.com/index.php/media?rootId=2
Majewski, J. 2014. Transmitting and Preserving Cultural Knowledge Through OpenWorld Role-Playing Games. Role of Higher Education Institutions in Society:
Challenges, Tendencies, and Perspectives, 1 (3). 130-136.
Monken, J. 2008. July 8. The Age of the World-Builders. Available online at:
http://www.escapistmagazine.com/articles/view/videogames/issues/issue_157/5023-The-Age-of-the-World-Builders
Savage, P. 2014. October 16. Mount & Blade: Warband expansion announced.
Available online at: http://www.pcgamer.com/mount-blade-warband-expansionannounced/
Sawyer, B. 2010. September 11. Serious Game Design Principle. Available online at:
https://bensawyer.wordpress.com/2010/09/11/serious-game-design-principle/
Sawyer, B., and Smith, P. 2008. Serious Games Taxonomy. Available online at:
http://www.seriousgames.org/presentations/serious-games-taxonomy2008_web.pdf
“ołt siak, M.

4. Rogate heł y sprzedają się lepiej , czyli ieprzystawal ość

współczes ego stanu wiedzy historycznej do potrzeb projektantów gier. Available
online at: http://ptbg.org.pl/dl/a/Micha%C5%82%20So%C5%82tysiak.pdf

12

ISSUE 2 (2015)
Squire, K. D. 2011. Video Games and learning: Teaching and Participatory Culture in
the Digital Age. New York: Teachers College Press.
Tan, B.-K. and Rahaman, H. 2009. Virtual Heritage: Reality and Criticism. In T. Tidafi, &
T. Dorta (eds.), Joining Languages, Cultures and Visions/Joindre Langages, Cultures et
Visions - CAADFutures 2009. Montréal: Les Presses de l'Université de Montréal. 143156.
Whitaker, B. and Andress, D. 2015. January 19. History Respawned: Assassin's Creed
Unity. Available online at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r47yZIYBUzc
Whitaker, B. and Glass, B. 2013. November 19. History Respawned: Assassin's Creed
IV. Available online at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9C9h3p5Efa4
Whitaker, B. and Luther, J. W. 2014, July 1. History Respawned: Freedom Cry and
Liberation. Available online at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwJzj9g5HNI
Wolf, M. J. P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation.
New York: Routledge.
Wu, S. W. P. and Jones, C. 2010. Re-Constructing History in World of Temasek.
Available online at:
https://www.dropbox.com/s/osnvslswkh4f3vg/CGAT2010P36.pdf?dl=0

13

