XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece

DIGITAL PRESERVATION, DOCUMENTATION AND ANALYSIS OF PAINTINGS,
MONUMENTS AND LARGE CULTURAL HERITAGE WITH INFRARED
TECHNOLOGY, DIGITAL CAMERAS AND RANGE SENSORS
A. Rizzi a, F. Voltolini a, S. Girardi a, L. Gonzo a, F. Remondino b
a

Fondazione B.Kessler-IRST, Trento, Italy (rizziale, fvoltolini, girardi, lgonzo)@itc.it
b
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry – ETH Zurich, Switzerland
fabio@geod.baug.ethz.ch

KEY WORDS: Photogrammetry, Range Sensors, Documentation, Infrared, Integration, Cultural Heritage

ABSTRACT:
The digital documentation and 3D modelling of Cultural Heritage monument and sites is receiving great attention in the last years.
There is a large variety of technologies for 3D surveying purposes and generally a technique is chosen according to the project
requirements, operator experience, budget and location constraints. Digital images and range sensors (laser scanner or stripe
projection systems) are generally the most used technologies used to virtually reconstruct the whole geometry of the studied
heritage. The combination of the two recording methods has demonstrated to be an efficient way of 3D modeling as no technique by
itself is able to provide accurate 3D results in all the applications and in short time. Other data are becoming nowadays pretty
common and important for a more deep documentation and investigation of heritages, i.e. image data coming from the light
spectrum outside the visible range. In this work, we present how we derive geometric 3D models of heritage structures by means of
close-range photogrammetry or range sensors while extra information acquired with infrared cameras are used for texture mapping
purposes and other studies. Data obtained from all those instruments are registered and fused together for documentation reasons,
historical studies, restoration plans and visualization purposes.

1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays the digital documentation and 3D modelling of
Cultural Heritage monument and sites is receiving much more
attention. On the technology side we currently have at our
disposal a vast array of relevant and efficient data acquisition
tools: high-resolution satellite images, large format digital aerial
cameras, hyperspectral sensors with hundreds of channels,
interferometric radar, range sensors, thermal cameras, model
helicopters, panoramic cameras and a large number of diverse
customer still video cameras and camcorders. The correct
selection, combination and integration of these techniques
requires great experience and the need to combine them comes
from the complexity of some heritage structures and the lack of
a single method capable of providing satisfactory results in all
measuring conditions.
The available technologies and methodologies for digital
recording of heritage sites and objects are really promising and
the whole heritage community is trying to adapt these
approaches for fastest, detailed and easy 3D documentations.
Indeed we have to face that our cultural heritage is constantly
under threat and danger. Architectonical structures and heritage
sites are threatened by pollution (air pollution, acid rain, birds,
etc), tourists, wars as well as environmental disasters like
earthquakes or floods or climatic changes. On the other hand
hidden cultural heritage (under the earth’s surface or those
partially visible above ground) are affected by agriculture
(vineyards, olive cultivation, erosion processes), change of
agricultural regimes due to economical change, mining, gravel
extraction, contraction of infrastructures (roads, railways),
industrial areas and those factors lead to its constant
destruction. Therefore 3D modelling could be extremely
powerful to improve identification, monitoring, conservation
and restoration. At the landscape scales, digital 3D modelling
and data analysis allow site managers and archaeologists to

conserve and protect as well as integrate, without breaks,
different archaeological features and physical context to better
document the area. At the monuments/sites scale, 3D can give
accurate measurements and objective documentation as well as
a new view under a different point of view. At the artefact
scale, 3D modelling allows to reproduce accurate
digital/physical replica of every piece that can be studied,
measured, showed, etc. as well as data for general public use,
virtual restoration and conservation.
In this work we report about the use and integration of infrared
thermography data, consumer digital camera images and range
data, for the documentation of complex architectures and
heritages. The goal is to explain the different techniques, their
integration and the used methodology for the digital recording
purpose.
The innovation in our approach consists in the combination of
data coming from different measuring sources and with
different resolutions (in geometry and texture) into a single
textured 3D model representing the structure of interest, which
can be analyzed and easily used by restorers.

2. 3D MODELLING TECHNIQUES
In this section we report the main 3D modelling techniques
used in the heritage field, i.e. image-base and range-based
modelling approaches, the most employed in the digital
documentation and preservation of cultural heritages.
In the choice of the modelling techniques to be adopted,
different factors have to be considered, as for example the
required level of detail, occlusions, time and space for data
acquisitions etc. It’s impossible to give a general rule and
decide which technique has to be used in a certain situation and
with which instrument. For sure, so far, the integration of the

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
different techniques is leading to the best results, in terms of
accuracy, time and details.
2.1 Image-Based Modelling (IBM)
Image data are probably the most complete source for digital
documentation and 3D modelling. Indeed, geometry and texture
information can be derived at the same time, using cheap
sensors and fast procedures. Generally the image measurement
phase is regarded as the most tedious part leading non-expert to
consider this modelling approach as inappropriate, time
consuming and, with the advent of range sensors, as out-ofdate. Between IBM methods, photogrammetry is a highly
accurate and flexible approach, suited for different scales and
used to derive metric and reliable information of a scene from a
set of images [Remondino and El-Hakim, 2006]. Images
acquired in the visible domain are generally employed, even if
IR or UV data could also be employed. Old images, stored in
databases or archives, may be also used to document lost
objects [Grün et al., 2004].
Semi-automatic image-based modelling techniques are
particularly suitable for 3D reconstruction of buildings and
man-made objects that contain generic geometrical shapes as
for example parallel lines, planes and right angles. Generally at
least two images are required, even if it is possible to calculate
3D data using a single image using geometrical constraints and
image invariants. With the advent of automated procedures and
fully digital products in the 90’s, photogrammetry has become
easier to use, cheaper and a wide range of commercial software
is available. Photogrammetric packages allow, after the
(manual) markerless tie point measurement and bundle
adjustment phase, to obtain sensor calibration and orientation
data, three-dimensional object point coordinates from multiimage networks, as well as wireframe or textured 3D models.
In order to obtain accurate and correct results, the employed
cameras have to be calibrated [Remondino and Fraser, 2006]. It
is generally better first to calibrate the internal camera
parameters with a given setting, using the most appropriate
image network, and then recover the object geometry using
those calibration parameters at the same camera setting.
The latest developments, in particular related to surface
measurement and reconstruction, are increasing the automation
[El-Hakim, 2006; Remondino and Zhang, 2006] and the trend is
to create automatic and user friendly tools that site managers,
archaeologists, restorers, conservators and the whole heritage
community could use instead of expensive and cumbersome
range sensors.
2.1.1 IR Thermography
Infrared (IR) thermography has been recently extensively used
for the documentation of cultural heritage, in particular for art
work studies [Pelagotti et al., 2007] and for monitoring and
conservation of historical buildings [Moropoulo et al., 2001].
IR thermography transforms the thermal energy, emitted by an
object in the infrared band of the electromagnetic spectrum, into
a visible image.
Thermography represents a great potentiality to be exploited in
many fields, but this simple technique is still not diffuse
because of a lack of adequate knowledge and its expensive
equipments. By utilizing a thermal imaging system, it is
possible to detect and display the normally invisible infrared
radiation (‘heat’) emitted by an object. This infrared energy is
converted to a real-time visible light image, which is displayed
on a monitor. Depending upon the type of thermal imager,
measurement of object temperature is also possible.

In particular, this non-destructive technique is used for the
assessment of various traditional–historical materials and
structures before and after they had been conserved, restored or
repaired. Non-destructive testing and evaluation are performed
on the materials and structures in order to assess the physicochemical behaviour of conservation treatments such as stone
cleaning, stone consolidation, as well as to disclose any
substrate features, such as tesserae on plastered mosaic
surfaces, to detect buried defects and inhomogeneity, to monitor
hidden structure and moisture content, to analyze corrosions
and to check the quality of welding and reinforcements
elements. Hidden structure identification, adhesion of frescoes
checking, cracks mapping and air flows studies are among the
most important applications for conservators and restorers.
Modern IR imagers resolve surface temperature differences of
0.1ºC or less. With this high sensitivity, they can evaluate
subtle thermal phenomena, which are only revealed in the form
of slight temperature gradients.
An example of painting analysis in terminal range is shown in
Figure 1. In this case, the IR image is able to show the structure
of the painting’s frame while in other IR ranges, the preparatory
drawing of the painter could also be detected [Pelagotti et al.,
2007]. Figure 2 shows the materials employed for the
consolidation of a textured wall. Similarly, we could detect the
compositions of buildings façades or reveal stoppings and
paddings.

Figure 1. The visible and the thermographic image of a painting.

Figure 2. An internal wall with frescos in the Buonconsiglio Castle
of Trento (Italy) and its appearance in IR thermography.

Infrared thermography can be used both as qualitative and
quantitative tool. Some applications do not require obtaining
exact surface temperatures. For example, to identify hidden
structure or adhesion of frescoes, it is sufficient to acquire
thermal signatures. This method of qualitative visual inspection
is based on image interpretation. On the other hand, quantitative
analysis requires a rectification of the thermal images to
provide correct length or surface measures.
The wavelength, e.g. the distance between successive peaks in
the oscillations of the electric and magnetic field, can vary over
a wide range representing a different phenomenon including
radio transmissions, microwaves, infrared, visible and
ultraviolet light, x-rays and gamma rays (Figure 3). The IR
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum includes wavelengths
from ca 0.78 μm to ca 1000 μm. Therefore this radiation has
wavelengths just a little longer than those of visible light and
cannot be seen with the unaided eye.

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece

Figure 3. Electromagnetic spectrum.

The infrared spectrum has a number of technological uses
including target acquisition and tracking by the military, remote
temperature sensing, short-ranged wireless communication,
spectroscopy, weather forecasting and astronomy.
The sensors able to record infrared radiations are usually
designed only to collect radiations within a specific bandwidth.
Indeed the infrared band is pretty wide and often subdivided
into smaller sections that relieve different features.
Short IR wavelength, also referred as near-IR, contains
wavelengths near the visible range (0.78 μm to ca 1.5 μm).
Images acquired in this range are well suitable for high
temperature subjects and are often used to image lasers, such as
in the development of LIDAR systems. In particular, IR
reflectography in the range between 0,8 and 2 μm allows the
analysis of many materials which compose the pictorial layers
[Fontana at al., 2005]. Most of the materials which compose the
painting’s layer are in fact at least partially transparent to the IR
radiation, therefore IR imaging generally allows to see features
underneath the layers visible by human eye and to visualize
under-drawings or pentimenti of the artist (Figure 4). This is
very useful information to decide whether a painting is the
prime version by the original artist or a copy, and whether it has
been altered by restoration work.
Figure 5. A visible (above) and thermography (below) image of
frescoed vaults. The IR analysis shows a very hot area (probably a pipe,
here highlighted by the contour) passing onto the frescos and producing
damages.

Figure 4. A typical painting cross-section, with its different layers and
the wavebands that can be used to investigate them.

Longer wavelengths (>8 μm) of the IR band are instead referred
as far-IR. In this part of the spectrum it is possible to see the
environment with or without visible illumination. The amount
of radiation emitted by an object increases with temperature,
therefore thermography allows to see variations in temperature.
All objects above 0 degrees Kelvin emit thermal infrared
energy, so thermal imagers can passively see all objects
temperatures. Infrared thermography cameras produce images
of invisible infrared or heat radiation and provide precise noncontact temperature measurement capabilities. Furthermore, it
is possible to check the structure of buildings and to find the
defects on one ore more parts of a structure.
Thermography with far-IR (up to ca 15 μm) is used to detect
insulation abnormalities in walls and roofs. In addition to this,
it’s possible to find and to determinate air leakage through
exterior walls and roofs, thermal irregularities (Figure 5), water
penetration and moisture accumulation. The moisture in
heritage materials can destroy structural integrity and nurture
mould. An infrared camera instantly shows what is wet and
what is dry.

Nevertheless performing correct measurements in long wave IR
images presents some difficulties because the value of energy
captured by the camera is affected by material’s characteristics
(like emissivity) and ambient conditions (presence of sunlight,
ambient temperature, moisture, distance of object, etc).
A conventional material that is transparent to near infrared, yet
opaque to long-wave IR, is common glass.
2.1.2 UV
On the other side of visible spectrum there is UV (Ultraviolet)
radiation. It is an electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength
shorter than 0.4 μm but longer than soft X-rays (10-2 μm). It is
possible to subdivide into near UV (0.4–0.32 μm), far UV
(0.32–0.1 μm) and deep UV (<0.1 μm).
In artwork studies, near UV images are mostly used to identify
different varnishes and over-paintings, in particular with
induced visible fluorescence imaging systems. When UV light
is shined onto an object, the result is the emission of photons in
the visible region of the spectrum. This phenomenon, called
fluorescence, occurs when light photons of high energy are
absorbed and re-emitted in the visible wavelengths regions
[Lettner et al., 2007]. Indeed, photons in the UV region of the
spectrum are absorbed by the painting varnish and this effect,
imaged with dedicated image systems, allow to characterize the
used material, evaluate the artwork conservation state or

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
localize retouches and previous restorations [Fontana et al.,
2005; Pelagotti at al., 2006; Pelagotti et al., 2007]. In a painting
the aged varnishes have different fluorescence properties than
new varnishes and some modern pigments have a different
fluorescence emission than traditional pigments, even if the
look alike under visible light. And fluorescence of oil paintings
under ultraviolet light shows if any restoration has been done.
Not only the paintings can be analyzed with UV but also other
objects like porcelain, ceramic and paper art showing their
hypothetical repairs and cracks.
2.2 Range-Based Modelling (RBM)
Range-based approaches are often complementary or combined
to image-based ones [El-Hakim et al. 2004; Voltolini et al.,
2007]. By using range sensors, we can generally perform
detailed 3D models, with fast acquisition but often large editing
efforts. While the recording devices are still expensive,
important progress has been made in recent years towards an
efficient processing and analysis of the range data.
The use of active sensors has become a very common source of
documentation data in recent years, in particular for non-expert
users, as they provide range data of surfaces in high resolution
and generally with high accuracy.
Like photogrammetry, active sensors are suitable for different
scales. Range-based systems [Blais, 2004] are mainly based on
two principles: triangulation and time delay. Triangulationbased systems work on short distance (between 0.1 and 500 cm)
and can reach very high accuracy and resolution. The high
accuracy in the 3D measurements is essential for 3D
documentation of very detailed object as sculptures, paintings,
low reliefs and other complex small objects. Time delay active
sensors are instead employed for large objects, as for example
architectures, rooms, walls and archaeological sites. These
sensors work on longer distances (i.e. 2 – 1000 m) but are less
accurate than triangulation systems. Other types of active
sensors are conoscopic systems that have better precision than
triangulation ones (few microns) but a smaller field of view. For
these reasons they are generally used for planar object, as for
example paintings and small coins.
In addition to the geometric information acquired with active
sensors, digital images have to be used (and generally

separately acquired) for the texture mapping purpose to get a
photo-realistic 3D model [Bernardini and Rushmeier, 2002; ElHakim at al., 2003].

3. DATA INTEGRATION
When multiple data sources are used and a unique final product
must be delivered, all the information should be integrated to
provide also better interpretation. The combination of the
different models, generated with different data sources and
techniques, is a key step in the 3D modelling process.
In this section we present the combination of data coming from
the different measuring sources reported before and having
different resolutions (in geometry and texture). The goal is to
produce a single textured 3D model representing the structure
of interest, which can be analyzed and easily used by restorers.
3.1 Integration of 3D data
Even though photogrammetry is acquiring a growing important
role in the digital cultural heritage documentation and
preservation fields and dense surface measurements can also be
realized using images [El-Hakim, 2006; Remondino and Zhang,
2006], range sensors are nowadays the most used instruments
for detailed and complex structures. But, according to our
experience and as also reported in many scientific publications,
in many cases, it is necessary to combine range data with data
obtained by means of image-based modelling.
The models created by means of image-based modelling are
assembled together and then registered into the same reference
system with those generated using range sensors. The
registration can be done either with common points or with
surveyed control points, or both.
An example of integration between data from different sources
is shown in Figure 6. This is an internal courtyard of the
Buonconsiglio Castle (Trento, Italy) where the main structures
(columns, arches and capitals) have been modelled through
image-based modelling while the ceiling by means of a
terrestrial laser scanner. The two models have been then merged
by using some common control points.

Figure 6: The internal courtyard of the Buonconsiglio castle in Trento (Italy) with the frescoed ‘Romanino loggia’. The wireframe model after the
integration of range and image models and different views of the final textured 3D model of the interior and exterior parts.

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
3.2 Integration 3D - Infrared
Multi spectral imaging techniques become a powerful tool in
the scientific analysis and documentation of objects, since
images in different wavelengths provide information that
human eye cannot see. Applied in the spectral range from UV,
visible up to IR, these techniques provide 3D model with both
spatial and spectral information. Merging these data gives an
additional dimension to the results and spectral information are
presented together with 3D and visible ones.

a)

more accurate measures and 3D results. We used special targets
and a dedicated testfield has been realized (Figure 7a).
Furthermore, in order to obtain clear targets in the IR spectrum,
some tests on the emissivity of different materials have been
done (Figure 7b).
Once the precise interior parameters of the IR camera have been
recovered, in order to register IR and visible images, some
features are detected on the photographs and with a bundle
adjustment the two image sets are aligned.
In Figure 8 a textured detail of the castle’s courtyard shown in
Figure 6 is reported. Through this 3D textured model it is
possible to analyse deeper the structure and the frescoes as the
IR data, registered onto the 3D geometry, provide for useful
quantitative analysis.

b)
Figure 7. Testfield for infrared camera (a), Emissivity tests (b).

In our case studies, we integrated visible image coming from
high resolution SRL digital camera with range data coming
from TLS and infrared data acquired with a FLIR P640 thermal
camera. The IR thermal camera works in the range between 7,5
and 13 μm, provide for 640x480 pixel images with a pixel of 25
μm. As for visible camera, the infrared one must be calibrated
by means of photogrammetric bundle adjustment to provide for

Figure 8. A detail of the internal courtyard, reconstructed using
digital visible images and afterwards textured using also IR data, to
allow quantitative considerations and documentations.

Figure 9. Palazzo Barbieri in Verona, Italy. The reconstructed 3D model of the exterior walls, visualized with the visible and infrared texture.

A second case study, shown in Figure 9, regards the 3Dinfrared model of Palazzo Barbieri, a historical building located
in Verona, Italy. The 3D geometry was obtained using 29
images acquired using a SRL Kodak DCS Pro with 13 Mega
pixel. On the other hand, to produce the infrared 3D model, 150
IR images acquired with the FLIR P640 thermal camera have
been used. The final goal is to measure correctly the surface
temperature of the historic building, nowadays used as city hall.
To correctly evaluate the thermal behaviour of the structure it is
necessary to know (i) emissivity, calculated knowing the
surface temperature of some reference object points, (ii)
distance from the object, (iii) atmospheric temperature, (iv)
relative humidity, (v) internal temperature, (vi) wind speed.

4. CONCLUSIONS
In this contribution we reported the use and integration of actual
digital surveying techniques for the documentation,
conservation and restoration of heritages. Even if
photogrammetry by itself is nowadays able to provide for
dense, detailed and accurate 3D models at different scale, we
believe that the use and integration of data coming from

multiple sources provide for better results and more complete
studies and documentations. Digital images acquired in the
visible spectrum and range data are generally used to recover
the 3D geometry and texture while for more deep analysis and
studies, IR and UV data must be also used. The integration
procedure is very useful for conservators and restorers as they
have at their disposal a complete set of information spanning
the different characteristics of the object under investigation
and maybe including also other data coming e.g. from other
chemical / physical analysis.

5. REFERENCES
Bernardini, F., Rushmeier, H., 2002: The 3D Model Acquisition
Pipeline. Computer Graphics Forum, 21(2), pp. 149-172
Blais, F., 2004: Review of 20 years of range sensor
development. Electronic Imaging, 13(1), pp. 232-240
El-Hakim, S., 2006: A sequential approach to capture fine
geometric details from images. In: The International Archives

XXI International CIPA Symposium, 01-06 October 2007, Athens, Greece
of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information
Sciences, Dresden, Germany, Vol. XXXVI , Part 5, pp. 97-102
El-Hakim, S.F., Beraldin, J.A., Picard, M. and Godin, G., 2004:
Detailed 3D reconstruction of large-scale heritage sites with
integrated techniques. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Application, 24(3), pp. 21-29
El-Hakim, S.F., Gonzo, L., Picard, M., Girardi, S., Simoni, A.,
Paquet, E., Viktor, H., Brenner C., 2003: Visualisation of
highly textured surfaces. 4th Int. Symp. VAST2003, pp. 231240, Brighton, UK
Fontana, R., Gambino, M.C., Greco, M., Marras, L., Pampaloni,
E., Pelagotti, A., Pezzati, L., Poggi, P., 2005: Two-dimensional
imaging and three-dimensional sensing data acquisition and
mutual registration for painting conservation. Videometrics
VIII, Vol. 5665-08, San Jose (CA), USA
Grün, A., Remondino, F. and Zhang, L., 2004:
Photogrammetric Reconstruction of the Great Buddha of
Bamiyan, Afghanistan. Photogrammetric Record, 19(107), pp.
177-199
Lettner, M., Diem, M., Sablatnig, R., Kammerer, P. and Miklas,
H., 2007: Registration of Multispectral Manuscript Images as
Prerequisite for Computer Aided Script Description. CVWW07:
12th Computer Vision Winter Workshop, St. Lambrecht,
Austria
Moropoulo, A., Avdelidis, N., Koui, M., Delegou, E., Tsiourva,
T., 2001: Infrared thermographic assessment of materials and
techniques for the protection of cultural heritage. Multispectral
and Hyperspectral Image Acquisition and Processing, SPIE
Vol. 4548
Pelagotti, A., Pezzati, L., Piva, A., Del Mastio, A., 2006:
Multispectral UV Fluorescence Analysis of Painted Surfaces.
Proceedings of 14th European Signal Processing Conference
EUSIPCO 2006, Firenze, Italy
Pelagotti, A., Del Mastio, A., Razionale, A., 2007: Active and
passive sensors for art works analysis and investigations.
Videometrics IX, Proc. SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging, Vol.
6491
Remondino, F., El-Hakim, S., 2006: Image-based 3D
modelling: a review. Photogrammetric Record, Vol. 21(115),
pp. 269-291
Remondino, F., Fraser, C., 2006: Digital Camera Calibration
Methods: Considerations and Comparisons. In: The
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
Spatial Information Sciences, Dresden, Germany, Vol. XXXVI,
Part 5, pp. 266-272
Remondino, F., Zhang, L., 2006: Surface reconstruction
algorithms for detailed close-range object modeling. In:
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
Spatial Information Sciences, Bonn, Germany, Vol. XXXVI,
Part 3, pp. 117-123
Voltolini, F., Remondino, F., Pontin, M., Gonzo, L., 2006:
Experiences and considerations in image-based-modeling of
complex architectures. In: The International Archives of
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information
Sciences, Dresden, Germany, Vol. XXXVI, Part 5, pp. 309-314

Voltolini, F., El-Hakim, S., Remondino, F., Girardi, S., Rizzi,
A., Pontin, M., and Gonzo, L., 2007: Digital Documentation of
complex architectures by integration of multiple techniques –
The case study of Valer Castle. Videometrics IX, Proc. SPIEIS&T Electronic Imaging, Vol. 6491, San Jose (CA), USA

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Castello del Buonconsiglio
in Trento and Municipality of Verona for providing unrestricted
access to the rooms for data acquisition.

