14
2016
IL CAPITALE CULTURALE
Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage
JOURNAL OF THE SECTION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE
Department of Education, Cultural Heritage and Tourism
University of Macerata

Il Capitale culturale
Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage
Vol. 14, 2016
ISSN 2039-2362 (online)

© 2016 eum edizioni università di macerata
Registrazione al Roc n. 735551 del 14/12/2010
Direttore
Massimo Montella
Co-Direttori
Tommy D. Andersson, Elio Borgonovi,
Rosanna Cioffi, Stefano Della Torre, Michela
Di Macco, Daniele Manacorda, Serge
Noiret, Tonino Pencarelli, Angelo R. Pupino,
Girolamo Sciullo
Coordinatore editoriale
Francesca Coltrinari
Coordinatore tecnico
Pierluigi Feliciati
Comitato editoriale
Giuseppe Capriotti, Alessio Cavicchi, Mara
Cerquetti, Francesca Coltrinari, Patrizia
Dragoni, Pierluigi Feliciati, Enrico Nicosia,
Valeria Merola, Francesco Pirani, Mauro
Saracco, Emanuela Stortoni
Comitato scientifico - Sezione di beni culturali
Giuseppe Capriotti, Mara Cerquetti, Francesca
Coltrinari, Patrizia Dragoni, Pierluigi Feliciati,
Maria Teresa Gigliozzi, Valeria Merola,
Susanne Adina Meyer, Massimo Montella,
Umberto Moscatelli, Sabina Pavone, Francesco
Pirani, Mauro Saracco, Michela Scolaro,
Emanuela Stortoni, Federico Valacchi, Carmen
Vitale
Comitato scientifico
Michela Addis, Tommy D. Andersson, Alberto
Mario Banti, Carla Barbati, Sergio Barile,
Nadia Barrella, Marisa Borraccini, Rossella
Caffo, Ileana Chirassi Colombo, Rosanna
Cioffi, Caterina Cirelli, Alan Clarke, Claudine
Cohen, Gian Luigi Corinto, Lucia Corrain,
Giuseppe Cruciani, Girolamo Cusimano,

Fiorella Dallari, Stefano Della Torre, Maria
del Mar Gonzalez Chacon, Maurizio De Vita,
Michela Di Macco, Fabio Donato, Rolando
Dondarini, Andrea Emiliani, Gaetano Maria
Golinelli, Xavier Greffe, Alberto Grohmann,
Susan Hazan, Joel Heuillon, Emanuele
Invernizzi, Lutz Klinkhammer, Federico
Marazzi, Fabio Mariano, Aldo M. Morace,
Raffaella Morselli, Olena Motuzenko, Giuliano
Pinto, Marco Pizzo, Edouard Pommier, Carlo
Pongetti, Adriano Prosperi, Angelo R. Pupino,
Bernardino Quattrociocchi, Mauro Renna,
Orietta Rossi Pinelli, Roberto Sani, Girolamo
Sciullo, Mislav Simunic, Simonetta Stopponi,
Michele Tamma, Frank Vermeulen, Stefano
Vitali
Web
http://riviste.unimc.it/index.php/cap-cult
e-mail
icc@unimc.it
Editore
eum edizioni università di macerata, Centro
direzionale, via Carducci 63/a – 62100
Macerata
tel (39) 733 258 6081
fax (39) 733 258 6086
http://eum.unimc.it
info.ceum@unimc.it
Layout editor
Cinzia De Santis
Progetto grafico
+crocevia / studio grafico

Rivista accreditata AIDEA
Rivista riconosciuta CUNSTA
Rivista riconosciuta SISMED
Rivista indicizzata WOS

Musei e mostre tra le due guerre
a cura di Silvia Cecchini e Patrizia Dragoni

Altri contributi

Saggi

«Il capitale culturale», XIV (2016), pp. 945-970
ISSN 2039-2362 (online)
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.13138/2039-2362/1436
© 2016 eum

Digitization of Cultural Heritage
and Business Model Innovation:
The Case of the Uffizi Gallery in
Florence

Luciana Lazzeretti*
Andrea Sartori**

Abstract
Recently, digitization has attracted increasing interest not only in museology and
computer science, but also in economics and managerial literature. Scholars have tried to
analyse how technological innovation is reshaping the role and mission of museums as
producers and distributors of cultural content and investigate the new business model that
emerges. The present work aims to investigate the adoption of ICT and innovation processes
in museums, and their interaction dynamics between curators and technology developers.
* Luciana Lazzeretti, Ordinario di Economia e gestione delle imprese, Università di Firenze,
Dipartimento di Scienze per l’Economia e l’Impresa, Via delle Pandette, 9, 50127 Firenze, email:
luciana.lazzeretti@unifi.it.
** Andrea Sartori, Dottore di ricerca, collaboratore di ricerca presso l’Alta Scuola Impresa e
Società - ALTIS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, email: andrea.sartori@hotmail.com.

946

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

We analyse an Italian successful museum case study, the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, where
digitization has been developed through a long-term partnership among the local University,
a creative ICT enterprise and other technical partners. Data collection integrates some semistructured interviews with information from websites, documents, publications, and the
museum’s institutional communication. The main results show that this case can be defined
as a Virtual Value Chain Model according to a curatorial approach at European level.
Reecentemente, la digitalizzazione ha attratto un interesse crescente non solo nelle
discipline museologiche e informatiche, ma anche nella letteratura economica e manageriale.
Gli studiosi hanno provato ad analizzare quanto l’innovazione tecnologica stia ridisegnando
il ruolo e la mission dei musei come produttori e distributori di contenuti culturali,
analizzando nel contempo i nuovi modelli imprenditoriali che emergono. Questo contributo
intende investigare l’adozione delle tecnologie dell’informazione e di nuovi processi nei
musei, e le dinamiche di interazione tra curatori e sviluppatori di tecnologie. Si analizza un
caso di successo italiano, la galleria degli Uffizi di Firenze, dove la digitalizzazione è stata
sviluppata nell’ambito di una lunga collaborazione con la locale Università, un’impresa
creativa e altri partner tecnici. La raccolta di dati integra le interviste semi-strutturate con
le informazioni dai siti web, documenti, pubblicazioni e la comunicazione istituzionale
del museo. I principali risultati mostrano come questo caso possa essere definito come un
modello di catena virtuale del valore secondo un approccio curatoriale a livello europeo.

1. Digitization and Business Models in Cultural Settings

The present work focuses on the digitization of tangible cultural heritage,
defined as the conversion into digital format of the cultural artifacts preserved
in museums.
The digitization of cultural heritage relies on the growing quality of technical
equipment, as well as on the fast-increasing processing and memory capacities
of computers to the purpose of acquiring, storing, archiving and distributing
technically accurate reproductions of cultural artefacts and sites1.
Recently, digitization has attracted increasing interest not only in museology
and computer science, but also in economics and managerial literature2. Scholars
have tried to analyse how technological innovation is reshaping the role and
mission of museums as producers and distributors of cultural content and
investigate the new business model that emerges. In particular, they investigated
how the transition to digitization and the Internet are affecting access to and
use of digital collections and which are the current challenges and opportunities
in this regard3.

1
2
3

Muller 2002; Cameron 2003.
Minghetti et al. 2001; Vom Lehn, Heath 2005.
Navarrete 2013.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

947

Such interest is increasing also due to the contribution to innovation and
local development of creative and cultural industries and organizations after
the financial crisis4. These innovations thrive under the new paradigm of
“open innovation”, which has opened a wide debate on business models and
eco-systems in cultural settings5; however, there is still a lack of established
conceptual frameworks and empirical inquiries6.
Some studies of high-technology sectors applied to cultural goods try and
investigate how Business Models (BM) change over time by examining the
characteristics of firms7. The challenge would be to create a set of items8 that
define quantitatively the BM components and analyse their time evolution. In
several cases, these situations take the form of a cross-fertilization, taking place
with the application to cultural goods of technologies previously applied in
other fields, thus according to an open innovation paradigm9. Although there
is much interest in the application of high technologies to cultural settings, no
formal definition of this experience has been provided yet10.
De Laurentis11 illustrates a fundamental change of cultural industries in
Wales, a transformation relating to the dynamics of knowledge exploration
and exploitation within the local and global digital value chain. She underlines
the potential offered by the exploitation of digital resources in re-engaging
peripheral regions, while exploring and respecting regional diversity. She adopts
an innovation economics approach to digitization to explore the role of cultural
or memory institutions – a term that groups archives, libraries and museums
as well as content providers. Consistently, she highlights the opportunities for
economic growth arising from the commercial exploitation of digital cultural
assets in the media, tourism and education industries.
For the publishing sector, Benghozi and Salvador12 investigate the new
digital ecosystem and the investment strategies carried out by editorial houses
in terms of R&D partnerships and new technological innovations. They aim to
understand which economic actors are taking charge of this challenge, where
they are located in the value chain, and how they are articulated with content
producers.
Bugge and Øiestad13, following the related-variety approach, study the effects
of digitization in the publishing industry and how this affects innovation and
regional development. They find three modes of knowledge re-combination, all
Bakhshi et al. 2008; Cunningham 2013.
Benghozi, Paris 2007; Rayna, Striukova 2014.
6 Lan 2004; Adner 2006.
7 Casprini et al. 2013.
8 Zott, Amit 2007.
9 Lazzeretti et al. 2011.
10 Chapman 2000; Bruno et al. 2010.
11 De Laureantis 2006.
12 Benghozi, Salvador 2013.
13 Bugge, Øiestad 2014.
4
5

948

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

of which reflect some of the dynamics unfolding in that industry, as well as the
epistemic bridging that links the old and the new in the economy.
In the museum sector, Camarero and Garrido14 analyse the mediating role
of technological and organizational innovation between market orientation and
socio-economic performance in Spanish, French, British and Italian museums.
They find a correlation between technological innovation and museums’
economic performance, where the latter refers to their indirect economic
effects, such as the increased attendance at the physical museums, as identified
by curators’ self-evaluation. Likewise, Bakhshi and Throsby15, despite initially
claiming for a technology-driven revolution in the value creation process of
cultural institutions, do not find evidence of online BMs being implemented at
the Tate Gallery, and conclude by hypothesizing the existence of some indirect
effects, like increased attendances and enhanced brand visibility. Consistently
with her view of digital heritage as an exchangeable good, Navarrete16 has
attempted to classify digital-only BMs through an analogy with the domain
of digital media, and identified five types – selling online spaces to advertisers,
selling physical products online, digital commerce, subscription-based
environments, and online donor programs – of which, however, only the third
is directly related to digital objects and seems compatible with the mission of
cultural heritage institutions.
A more articulated analysis has been recently provided by the Bertacchini
and Morando’s paper17, which discusses four BMs for digital collections based
on current experiences at leading heritage institutions. The authors identify
four archetypal BMs for access to and use of digital images of artworks,
namely online display, proprietary licensing, open licensing and user-generated
art images. The authors identify an underlying tension between the objectives
of increasing access towards, and extracting revenues from digital collections,
highlighting a lack of sustainable BMs based on open access – an aspect also
highlighted with reference to digital libraries18. A similar trade-off between
diffusion and revenue generation is also emerging for the case of multimedia
tours and mobile applications, as «experience to date has shown that apps and
other mobile products that are free to the end-user achieve greater usage rates
than those with a charge»19.
The main approach to digitization emerging in the European context is
mainly comparable to a pipeline or digital value chain model (fig. 1), wherein
digital heritage contents are produced in the museum for collection management

14
15
16
17
18
19

Camarero, Garrido 2008; Camarero et al. 2011.
Bakhshi, Throsby 2010.
Navarrete 2013.
Bertacchini, Morando 2013.
Chowdury 2013.
Burnette et al. 2011.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

949

purposes and then disseminated through the Web20. Instead, in North America
and in Canada it prevails a participatory perspective, a co-construction approach
to digital applications, wherein museum professionals are involved not only in
the mere provision of contents, but also in concept design, whilst technology
developers exert in turn a strong influence on curatorial choices of display and
communication21.
In this scenario the present work aims to investigate the adoption of ICT
and innovation processes in museums, and their interaction dynamics between
the different communities of specialists (museologists, marketers, technology
developers, etc.) involved in digitization projects, within and outside the
museum. By this, it is meant to contribute to the recent debate on the new BMs
for settings located in cultural clusters. We analyse an Italian successful museum
case study, the Uffizi Gallery in the city art of Florence, where digitization has
been conceived for the development and dissemination of digital collections, in
a long-term partnership between the local University, a creative ICT enterprise
(Centrica srl) and other technical partners, originating not only new digital
cultural products, but also some cross-fertilization evidences.
According to a long-term case study methodology, we analyse the digitization
process since its beginning until the end of 2013. The research site selected is
one of the oldest and most important museums in Europe, the Uffizi Gallery in
Florence, where digitization strategies mostly concern the implementation of
digital collections and mobile applications.
Multiple sources of data (semi-structured interviews with information from
websites, internal documents, publications, and institutional communication of
the museum) were collected in order to reconstruct the digitization process. A
total of four interviews were conducted during June 2012-October 2013 with the
technologists at the University of Florence who collaborated with the museum
in the first phase of digitization (late 1980s-1990s), with the main external
partner (Centrica srl) which started collaboration in the 2000s, and the museum
management. Interviews with technology developers aimed to understand the
technological and economic aspects of the process, whereas interviews with the
museum’s management focused on the internal perspective about the digitization
process and its role within the overall marketing and communication strategy.
After the present introduction, the paper is organized as follows. In section
2 we present the main evolutionary trajectories in digitization. In section 3 we
focus on the digitization innovation process in the Uffizi Gallery of Florence;
we analyse the different phases (computerization and commercialization) and
the interaction between the museum and its main industrial partners. Finally,
we conclude discussing the implications in terms of BM innovation for both the
Uffizi Gallery and the creative firms involved in the digitization process.
20
21

Kéfi, Pallud 2011.
Soren, Lemelin 2004; Proctor 2010.

950

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

2. The Main Evolutionary Trajectories in Digitization

Digitized copies of cultural artefacts present some characteristics which
open up opportunities for differentiated applications in the fields of safeguard,
distribution and fruition22.
Over the last decades, museums have had to face increasing social and
economic pressures, and different proposals for a reformation of their societal
function have been advanced23. In particular, recent literature calls for a more
explicit involvement of local communities and visitors through the provision of
emotionally challenging experiences, also in relation to the variety of visitors’
backgrounds and agendas24.
The introduction of new technologies of information and communication
(ICT) has been advocated as a fundamental support to the reorganization of
museums25.
Since the 1990s, the diffusion of interactive multimedia tools has opened
new opportunities for enabling people to select the information contents
desired and for recreating immersive and stimulating experiences26. In the
2000s, the emergence of cyber-museology has enabled online access to museum
collections, whilst de-constructing academic criteria of classification and linear
representations, allowing visitors to associate and remix exhibits according to
personal meanings27. In Europe, the digitization of museum collections has
been explicitly advocated by national governments and the EU and have been
accordingly financed so far mostly by public funding. In particular, through
the DIGICULT project concluded in 2002 (European Commission, 2002), the
EU has aimed to assess the social potential of digitization and to coordinate
the projects carried out individually by single governments and institute by
defining common guidelines and standards. This has resulted in the creation
of a common digital library (Europeana, released in 2008) that would gather
all the collections of European libraries, archives and museums as one of
the building blocks of a Single Digital Market28. The delivery of digitised
contents to Europeana has been implemented over the last 5 years through
European research projects and thematic networks, with an overall funding
of 140.1 million euros in the 2009-2013 period (our elaboration on European
Commission data), although economic sustainability has represented a sensitive
issue since the start29. Moreover, the EU has strongly endorsed the idea that

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Cignoni, Scopigno 2008; Guttertag 2010.
Anderson 2004.
Kotler, Kotler 2000; Witcomb 2003.
EC 2002.
Barry 1999.
Cameron 2003
EC 2012.
CIPFA 2009; Stroeker, Vogels 2012.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

951

digitized items and metadata should be made public on an open basis in order to
enhance access to the collective memory and economic benefits for the cultural
and creative industries through the “re-use” of digitised contents30. However,
European projects for digitization of cultural heritage are facing the growing
competition of leading IT companies such as Google, which has approached the
digitization of librarian documents in 2005 with Google Books Search and of
museum collections with the Art Project in 2011, which aims to create a metacollection of leading museums in the world.
Most recently, the focus of the discourse regarding the impacts of IT on
museums has shifted from the mere digitisation of collection towards the creation
of two-way interactions between the museum and its audience, as well as the
sharing of experiences among visitors. This should be seen in connection with
the advent of the Social Web, including new systems of interaction ranging from
forums and blogs to social media, which especially in Northern America31 have
been emphasized as an opportunity for the formation of online communities
who engage in the exchange of knowledge and personal interpretations.
However, until recently Web 2.0 facilities have found limited applications in
Europe due to a certain resistance by museums in letting go of their authority on
the interpretation of the objects32. Only in the last years, museums in Italy have
started engaging consciously with these opportunities33, also under the influence
of the initiatives enacted by independent online communities such as Invasioni
Digitali (Digital Invasions34). The aim of developing online communities and
networks engaged in the creative re-use of digitised cultural contents has been
also embraced by Europeana through initiatives such as EuropeanaCreative and
EuropeanaSpace, also in order to attract alternative revenues to compensate
decreasing EU funding35. The main evolutionary phases of digitization of cultural
heritage are summarized in figure 2.
A series of parallel or intersecting trajectories of development emerges,
leading to an ongoing convergence of their multiple courses (digital collections,
multimedia tours and Web 2.0 facilities) towards mobile platforms. This
platform is opening unprecedented opportunities for heritage institutions to
provide customized interpretive facilities, thanks to a closer integration of
different media and functions. Visitors can access location-specific contents,
tag the artworks, visualize suggestions for further visit and share comments
with other users, or save resources for later consultation through bookmarking
facilities. However, this potential multiplication of contents and functions
has opened a new array of issues to be addressed, regarding the modalities of
30
31
32
33
34
35

Comité de Sages 2011.
Soren, Lemelin 2004; Proctor 2010; Simon 2010.
Lopez et al. 2010; Fletcher, Lee 2012.
Bonacini 2012; Lazzeretti et al. 2015.
<http://www.invasionidigitali.it>, 02.11.2016.
Europeana 2012.

952

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

delivery for differentiated informational contents in specific spatial and temporal
settings (pre, during and post-visit), the choice of language and tone of voice, or
the role of visitor agency vs curatorial authority and social interactions.
In sum, in the first historical phase the digitization of cultural artefacts and
museum collections (2D digital format) was mostly considered as a means to
spread access to cultural contents and enable an «unlimited audience»36 to enjoy
replicas of artefacts and museum environments from a distance through the
Internet, thus avoiding the spatial and temporal limitations of the actual visit
to heritage sites or museums. However, the emergence of new technological
trajectories such as multimedia exhibits, Web 2.0 spaces, virtual reality models
and mobile applications has fostered the emergence of a debate regarding the
impact of ICT on the interpretation and co-creation of cultural heritage.

3. The Digitization Process in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence

The Uffizi Gallery is one of the most ancient and important art galleries in
Italy and Europe. The building was designed and realized in 1560 by Giorgio
Vasari under the commission of Cosimo I Medici as a headquarter for the
judiciary administration (“Uffizi”) of the Duchy, next to the family residence
Palazzo Vecchio37. The Uffizi Gallery has been declared national museum since
the Italian Unity in 1861, and is currently part of the Polo Museale (Museum
Systems) of Florence, administered by the Superintendence for Architectural,
Landscape, Historical, Artistic and Ethno-anthropological Heritage of the
Province of Florence, Pistoia and Prato, an administrative branch of the
Ministry of Cultural Goods and Activities. Stably featuring among the 10
most visited museums in Italy, the Uffizi Gallery has experienced a substantial
stability in visitor numbers – on average, about more than 1.25 million paying
admittances per year, with a slight increase after 200538. This important site
is situated in one of the most important Italian museum cluster39, in a district
specialized in high technology applied to cultural goods, tourism and Made in
Italy manufacturing40.

36
37
38
39
40

Keene 1998.
Barocchi, Ragionieri 1982.
MIBAC 2012.
Lazzeretti, Cinti 2009.
Casprini et al., 2014

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

953

3.1. The computerization phase: from the Uffizi Strategic Project to the
DADDI project (1989-2005)

a) The Uffizi Strategic Project
The first formalized project of computerization at the Uffizi Gallery dates
to 1989, when the State Archives hosted in Vasari’s building were moved to
another location and their vacant premises were allocated to the museum.
The Uffizi Strategic Project was thus launched by the Superintendence and the
Director of the museum with the aim of upgrading and adapting the newly
acquired areas for exhibition purposes, allowing at the same time a further
expansion of the museum. The project included four main axes of intervention,
specifically: a) the monitoring of environmental conditions in the exhibition
rooms; b) the analysis of the state of conservation of artworks; c) the automation
of data collection; d) their remote diffusion. Each of these fields offered an
opportunity for testing and validating innovative techniques developed by the
projects’ scientific partners: the Department of Information Engineering of the
University of Florence (DIE) and the National Council of Research41.
The Uffizi Strategic Project demonstrated the willingness of the public
cultural administration to experiment with innovative technologies adopted at
the time by local research labs (a case of cultural cluster and technological
district).
In particular, digital imaging had represented one of the main areas of
specialization of DIE for almost two decades, having emerged from the
convergence of optics, electronics and computer sciences. Since the late 1970s, a
Lab of Digital Images had been operating within the Department to experiment
and validate the acquisition of 2D digital images. In this early phase of research,
cultural heritage was considered as a relatively new field of application with
respect to more established ones (processing of X-ray radiography and nuclear
body scanning, remote sensing of terrestrial resources and robotics). In this
context, the main potential for the computer was identified in the totally
objective acquisition of artwork images, from which the geometrical modules
and mathematic proportions underlying the composition could be extracted
through suitable digital filters42.
The first tests had been conducted autonomously at the Lab since the late
1970s yielding technically encouraging results, which allowed the developers
to sensitize cultural professionals about these potentials through scientific
publications and also personal contacts with art curators. In this context,
the strategic project provided the first opportunity for conducting tests in
collaboration with a museum, which was formalized through the establishment
41
42

Cappellini 1993.
Cappellini et al. 1978.

954

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

of a Department of New Technologies for Artworks (DNTA) at the Uffizi, with
the mission of transferring digital imaging expertise from DIE to the users.
b) The RAMA and MUSA Esprit Project
In 1994, the partnership was strengthened through the joint participation
of the Uffizi, DIE and SIDAC-STET (a branch of the State-owned IT group
FINSIEL, then acquired by the Telecom Italia group) to two pilot European
projects of museum automation and digitization, namely Remote Access to
Museum Archives (RAMA) and MUSA-ESPRIT. The former had the objective
of connecting the existing databases of leading European museums through
telecommunication networks, enabling different forms of research and data
exchange from remote, such as the consultation of catalogue records based on
text fields, the sharing of results of diagnostic campaigns, and the request of
licences for using contents for publishing purposes43.
With respect to RAMA, MUSA-ESPRIT focused more specifically on the
development of digital imaging techniques for the remote diffusion of cultural
contents, especially with the aim of improving the links between museums and
the publishing sector within the value chain of multimedia publishing. The main
achievement of MUSA was the development of the “VASARI” scanner by DIE
and its installation at the Department of Technologies of the Uffizi. VASARI
consisted in a black-and-white, high-resolution (300 ppi) camera connected
to a multi-spectral (7 bands) system of digital acquisition that allowed to
reconstruct colour images, and was characterized by a higher level of chromatic
fidelity compared to earlier devices. This application was initially envisioned
as a valuable support to preservation and restoration activities, fulfilling the
necessity for the museum to gather a diagnostic expertise capable to converge
into a database, in order to enable a “comparative” reading of artworks’
behaviour over time and their variation.
Within MUSA, a smaller version of the unwieldy equipment was developed
by the British firm “Time and Precision” under the guidance of DIE and the
National Gallery. A software system of colour certification was developed,
which enabled to compare the colour of digital images with that of “real”
artworks. The resulting digital images were thus inserted into the Uffizi database
(developed by SIDAC-STET within RAMA) and made accessible to members
of the network.
The achievement of these goals also marked the end of the experience of the
Department of New Technologies for Artworks, which was deemed to have
successfully accomplished its function and was discontinued in 1999.

43

Cappellini et al. 1995a.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

955

c) Centrica srl spin off and DADDI Project
In 1999, Marco Cappellini and three other partners established the firm
Centrica srl, which was to catch the opportunity offered by the rise of Internet,
digital imaging and multimedia applications, focusing on cultural heritage.
The main initiative in this period was the Digital Archive through Direct
Imaging (DADDI) project, started in 2000 by the Uffizi, DIE and Centrica,
with the technical sponsorship of Phase One A/S (Denmark), and the financial
support of Toppan Printing Co. Ltd (Japan). The project aimed to define a
standard procedure for the direct digital acquisition and processing of artworks
involving functions such as lighting control and chromatic correction. The
project involved the acquisition of all the artworks exhibited at the Gallery at
a minimum spatial resolution of 8000 x 8000 pixels and their insertion in a
digital archive in multiple resolutions for specific types of utilization (research,
restoration, database management, etc.)44.
The actual acquisition phase was performed by Centrica, under the
guidance and supervision of the Uffizi and DIE and using hardware and
software equipment provided by the technical sponsors (which were joined by
a further leading Japanese corporation in the following phases of the project).
As DADDI showed a more marked focus on the opportunities for diffusion
and commercialization of digital images, copyright management issues were
addressed by testing a “digital watermarking” technique – consisting in the
insertion into the digital image of an identifying field that is invisible to the
user, but can be easily tracked and decoded by the owner45 so as to control the
further utilizations of the file.
In 2007 started a new digitization project focused on masterpieces. The
project, promoted by Hitachi-Centrica-MICC and still active today, is creating
a set of very high-resolution images of works of art (1000-1200 ppi) in the Polo
Museale Fiorentino, mainly from the Uffizi Gallery.
Between 2008 and 2009, digital images have been integrated into digital
museum cards (i.e., the descriptive labels containing all the information related
to specific artworks, including restorations and movements) for which a
consultation software has been specifically developed by the firm Parallelo in
order to simplify the retrieval and management of the collections46. Whilst the
information are used internally for documentation purposes, they have also
been made available to the public through a dedicated section of the website.

44
45
46

Acidini, Cappellini 2008.
Barni, Bartolini 2004.
Sframeli, Parallelo 2009.

956

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

3.2. The commercialization phase: technologies for distribution, fruition
and cross-fertilization (2000-2012)

a) Technologies for distribution
Whereas over the latest years DIE has further pursued the application of
digital imaging techniques for preservation and virtual restoration47, Centrica
has specialized in the development of computer-based systems for the remote
distribution of digital images.
The first system of this kind was launched in 2000 with the name of
XLimage®. It consists of an Internet server that enables the high-resolution
visualization of digital artworks with different modalities (Intranet, Internet,
mobile). It incorporates a colour management system that limits chromatic
alterations in the migration across different devices, and a watermarking
technique based on the insertion of an alphanumeric code in the file. Following
the previous experience of collaboration, the Uffizi were one of the first adopters
of XLimage®, using it for distributing images through the museum website.
The following advancements concerned the design of an integrated system
of access to digital collections, which was launched in 2005 as XLphoto®.
With respect to XLimage®, this product includes a set of additional features
such as an automated and customized facility for the commercial licensing
of cultural contents on the basis of a set of parameters (type and country of
publication, exclusivity of use, size and position of the image in the publication)
and a database-driven search engine (XLspider®) that enables to track digital
watermarks.
As these characteristics promised to facilitate the distribution and licensing
of digital images to the publishing industry, XLphoto® was experimented by
the Uffizi to manage requests by external buyers.
The most recent direction in product development at Centrica has targeted
the integration of software systems for the distribution of digital artworks with
hardware interfaces, in order to provide a complete experience of fruition.
To this purpose, a new product named Ars Touch was launched in 2008,
consisting in a PC workstation that runs the XLimage® software, connected
with a touch screen that allows the visualization in high resolution and the
interactive exploration of digitized artworks. ArsTouch has been mostly used
in cultural events at Florentine institutions to offer visitors the possibility to
visualize paintings or other visual or textual materials.

47

Cappellini et al. 2003.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

957

b) Technologies for fruition
The ArsTouch platform also provided the basis for the Uffizi Touch®, an
interactive software application launched in 2010 that gives access to the
museum’s digital archive48. Through a touch screen available in three size
formats (“totem”, “wall” and “studio”), the system enables the visualization
in high resolution (between 40 and to 150 megapixels) of over 1,100 artworks
belonging to the collection, which can be searched and browsed by author, title,
historic period and museum room – though de-contextualized from the actual
museum environment.
The software has been entirely designed by Centrica and descriptive cards of
the artworks in Italian and English have been realized by Centrica and verified
by the museum, which has made an agreement with the firm under a royalty
calculated as a percentage of the unit price of the installation. Starting from
2012, the system has also been distributed as a mobile application for iPhones,
iPads and iPod Touch. An updated version of the Uffizi Touch® has been
launched in 2012 with additional functions based on the new XlKnowledge®
platform – developed by Centrica such as the thematic search facility and the
dynamic suggestion of artworks according to specific iconographic elements,
such as jewellery, landscape or pieces of furniture.
Uffizi Touch® is a good example to analyse the difference/similarity of
perspective between curators vs technology developers over digitisation. From
the curator’s point of view, the technological instrument enables an accurate
analysis of the artist’s technique and the state of preservation of the pictorial
surface, which in turn can support the diagnostic phase and the critical exercises.
For technology developers it represents a new modality of fruition that
overcomes the usual constraint of the physical visit (opening times, crowding,
lighting conditions, etc.)49.
The comparison between the curatorial and the commercial perspective over
the product highlights how the same technology may perform differentiated
but complementary functions within the digital value chain, according to the
schema proposed in figure 3, thus virtually intervening at the two ends of the
process.
Moreover, Uffizi Touch® represents an exception within the current
scenario of museum mobile applications because it works mostly before and
after the visit. The mobile applications and smart-phones provide first of all
information for visit planning purposes (opening hours, ticket fees, events, etc.);
then they include multimedia resources and interpretive tools (descriptive cards,
audio tours, podcasts, videos, etc.) assisting the visit experience50; finally, in
48
49
50

Cappellini et al. 2010.
Cappellini 2010.
Burnette et al. 2011.

958

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

the post-visit phase, they offer opportunities to expand one’s knowledge of
specific or related artworks at home. To this purpose, bookmarking facilities
have been introduced through which the visitor can select artworks and related
interpretive materials to be consulted after the visit on the museum website51.
A parallel direction of development refers to social interaction facilities, like the
sharing of comments with other visitors through social networks, either in real
time or after the visit52.
Consistently with their focus, so far Ars Touch® and Uffizi Touch® have best
deployed their potential in situations that are unrelated or substitutive to the
actual museum experience,53 but also as a promotional opportunity for Italian
heritage (see figure 4).
The peculiar character of Uffizi Touch®, within the museum app scenario
is indirectly confirmed by the fact that, in the same period, the Polo Museale
authorized another mobile application named Uffizi by the local web
communications firm Parallelo, which has also developed the system of
consultation for digital museum cards and the museum website. The product
is based on the software platform Ars First Guide, which combines three
functions: mobile tour guide, digital collections and educational tools.
The application includes four modalities of exploration: map, which displays
the most representative rooms of the museum and lists the exhibited works;
works, which enables the visualization of 33 masterpieces from the collection
with related descriptive cards; museum, providing practical information for
visit planning such as opening times, ticket fees, directions and reservations;
news, including a calendar of the events at the museum. Similarly to Uffizi
Touch®, a smaller selection of images in high resolution belonging to the digital
archives and descriptive texts are provided by the Polo Museale.
The promotional material presents its possible functions before, during
and after the visit, stressing more complementary than alternative utilizations
(Parallelo). In this light, the two applications seem to intervene in distinct
contexts, allowing the museum to differentiate its interpretive and promotional
strategies: whereas Uffizi Touch® represents a sort of virtual replica of the
museum, Uffizi mostly acts in support to the physical visit experience.
Consistently with their focus, Ars Touch and Uffizi Touch have best deployed
so far their potential in situations that are unrelated or substitutive to the actual
museum experience. As an example, in one of its first public presentations
in 2009, Ars Touch screen installations were used to create a virtual gallery
at the Baptistery of Pistoia where a selection of artworks from the Uffizi and
Marty 2011.
Proctor 2011.
53 In 2010, the Uffizi Touch was selected by the Commission of the Italian government for the
World Expo 2010 to implement Uffizi, a virtual exhibition for Shanghai Art Museum. In 2012, a
series of virtual exhibitions were organized in Japan and Centrica inaugurated a dedicated “Space
Italy” section at the National Museum of China in Beijing.
51
52

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

959

other collections were displayed. Similarly, the following year Uffizi Touch was
selected by the Commission of the Italian Government for World Expo 2010
in Shanghai to realize, in partnership with national and regional institutions,
the Virtual Uffizi exhibition at the Art Museum of Shanghai (June 27 – July
21 2010) where a selection of artworks was displayed through nine large
touch screens, receiving a total of 35,000 visitors in 25 days. A series of virtual
exhibitions organized in Japan in partnership with Hitachi Ltd. at the Institute
of Italian Culture in Tokyo in November-December 2011, at the Tokyo Fuji
Art Museum, the Kyoto University Museum and the Hitachi DIS Showroom in
Yokohama followed in 2012. Here, besides the navigable digital collections, 10
life-size replicas of masterpieces and a digital theatre composed of 5 wall screens
projecting works and a virtual tour of the museum were added, achieving a
satisfactory results of attendance. In July 2012, Centrica has inaugurated a
dedicated “Space Italy” section at the National Museum of China in Beijing,
where narrative videos and interactive touch-screen installations presenting the
geography and history of Florence are displayed as a complement to virtual
replicas of artworks. Other virtual exhibitions have then been organized, most
recently the Uffizi in Milan (Uffizi Virtual Experience in Milan, Fabbrica del
Vapore (January 22 – March 10 2016) which contains an immersive section
with large-sized digital images of the artworks, and an interactive one with
touch-screen workstations that provide the zooming and thematic navigation
features of UffiziTouch®.
d) The role of digital collections within the Uffizi’s communication strategy
From the reconstruction of the digitization process provided above as well
as from the interviews, in the museum’s perspective, the digital value chain
substantially replicates the production process of analogue contents (such as the
organization of a physical exhibition), with the exception that the contents are
translated into a digital format and then disseminated through digital channels.
This view is confirmed by the fact that the digital collection in Uffizi Touch®
substantially replicates the curatorial setting of the physical museum, and that
the virtual exhibitions organized in partnership by the Gallery and Centrica
have been conceived to provide an interactive and immersive experience that
extends the one that can be enjoyed at the museum.
Such an approach is grounded in a specific museological perspective, which
sees the main task of museum curators and staff as that of providing complete and
historically authoritative information and interpretations about the artworks.
It is rather surprising, however, that in this perspective – in opposition to early
concerns with the possible «lost of the aura» of the original artwork entailed

960

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

by the proliferation of digital copies54 – the adoption of digital communication
channels is seen as a favourable opportunity for spreading awareness and
knowledge of the museum’s collections55, enabling users to enjoy a deepness of
appreciation that is usually available only to museum curators. As the Director
of the Gallery notices, the unprecedented possibility of appropriating a faithful
reproduction of the collections may have two opposite effects on the user, that
is either a “healthy” relativization of the cult for the authentic, or instead an
increased veneration of the masterpiece as a “relic” (personal communication).
The relative enthusiasm for the opportunities enabled by digital channels is
confirmed by the fact that the Uffizi have been the first Italian museum to
subscribe to Google Art Project in 2011, where a first selection of 73 digital
artworks and a virtual tour of selected rooms have been made available. It
should be remarked, however, that the digital watermarking system developed
by the University allows the museum to maintain control over the diffusion
of its digital collections, avoiding the negative consequences of uncontrolled
proliferation. In this light, the Uffizi have chosen an opposite business model
to the open release of digital collections and metadata that is being encouraged
by the European Commission: in this sense, if the museum was to adhere to the
“cultural commons” policy currently pursued by Europeana, it would have to
renounce to a significant source of revenues and let go of part of its control over
the use and re-use of digital contents.
With its focus on the «quality and quantity of data inserted on-line»56,
moreover, the web communication strategy of the Uffizi and the whole Polo
Museale Fiorentino has remained until recently largely unaffected by the
recent shift of emphasis towards interaction and co-creation with online
communities57. As an example, the official website of the Polo did not offer
until recently spaces of discussion nor links to social network profiles, except
a YouTube channel opened in 2011 to broadcast curatorial presentations and
videos related to museum activities.
Besides the willingness to preserve the museum’s reputation as a trusted
source of knowledge, a further cause for limited engagement with the
Social Web lies in the rigidity of organizational charts in the Italian cultural
Besser 1997, for example.
This objective has not been pursued exclusively through the adoption of online communication
channels, but also through physical initiatives among which the series of exhibition “La Città
degli Uffizi” (2011-2014), <http://www.lacittadegliuffizi.org>, 20.08.2016. This consisted in an
innovative format where artworks held at the Gallery (including pieces that cannot be exhibited
regularly and are conserved in the depots) were temporarily exhibited in their original environment
together with works belonging to the same artist or period. Besides spreading knowledge of the
museum’s collection outside its walls, this initiative also aimed at reconnecting the artworks with
their historical place and period of origin, so (temporarily) reversing the “loss of context” that has
affected Italian cultural heritage due to the process of musealization.
56 Acidini, Cappellini 2008, p. 26.
57 Proctor 2010, Simon 2010.
54
55

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

961

administration, where hybrid figures such as social media managers can be
hardly accommodated. In the case of the Uffizi, these constraints have been
partially avoided by outsourcing web communication and the design of mobile
applications to private partners, with the side effect of reducing the opportunities
for cross-fertilization of competences and communication strategies between
the museum staff and the IT community.
In August 2015 a new museum Director has been appointed, coinciding with
a broader reformation enacted by the Ministry of Culture in order to renovate
Italian museums which has attributed a larger organizational and financial
autonomy to individual institutions. Therefore, the Uffizi may bring major
changes to their web communication strategy, also thanks to the increased
organizational flexibility that could allow introducing specialised professional
figures.

4. Conclusions

Concluding this analysis of the digitization process at the Uffizi Gallery,
we would like to underline some particularly interesting results in terms of the
debate on the digitization of cultural heritage, BM innovation and eco-systems
in cultural settings.
First, the case of the Uffizi provides significant empirical evidence of
application of the digital value chain model as described by De Laurentiis58.
The process of digitizing art collections is conceived and implemented without
particular strains, as the result of a fruitful collaboration in which museum
curators are able to combine technical and cultural competencies developed by
working with both the University and local firms.
In the first period (1989-2000), the digitization of collections for
documentation and research purposes was implemented through special
projects, and experiments of knowledge transfer were put in place. Later on
(2000-2013), there was a completion of digitization and knowledge transfer,
with a shift of focus to public access and commercial use (mobile applications
and virtual exhibitions). This stage was carried out for the most part
autonomously by the private partners. Along the digitization process, however,
different and complementary perspectives were carried by the museum staff
and technology developers: for the former, digitization supports diagnostics
and critical exercises, whereas for the latter it represents a new modality of
fruition that overcomes the usual constraint of the physical visit. In general, the
long-standing partnership between the Uffizi and software developers seems to
have been goal-oriented, focusing more on the definition and implementation
58

De Laurentiis 2006.

962

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

of high-quality digitization techniques rather than on the experimentation of
innovative communication strategies.
From a museological and epistemological viewpoint, the value chain or
pipeline model adopted in the case study emphasizes the scientific rigour of
the reproductions and metadata inserted into the Web, according to a view of
communication as a one-way process of data transmission from an authoritative
source to the audience. This view, however, may run into contrast with the
growing emphasis on the co-creation of cultural values with online communities
that underpins the Social Web discourse59.
From an economic standpoint, in the case study the partnership with the
University and private firms has enabled balanced funding to the digitization
process, differently from the general European scenario, where established
reliance on public funding is leading to a serious challenge of long-term
sustainability60. The BM adopted by the Uffizi, however, is in open contrast
with the “commons” model advocated by the European Union and Europeana
in order to encourage the use and re-use of digitized cultural contents by the
creative industries61. In this context, the long-term impacts of the increased
availability of new technical instruments for the negotiation of licensing
agreements62 and the control of subsequent uses of digital images, such as the
digital watermarking system developed by DIE, should be further assessed.
From a technological standpoint, the case study confirms the ongoing
convergence of multiple trajectories (digital collections, multimedia tours
and Web 2.0 facilities) towards mobile platforms, as already evidenced in
museological and technical literature (section 2).
It should be remarked that the digitization of the Uffizi Gallery was made
possible not only by a long-term public-private partnership, but also by the
strategic role played by the territorial context in which the museum is located,
i.e. a cultural cluster in a world-renowned city of art as well a technological
district specialized in cultural goods, a combination that literature on local
development has already widely explored63. In this context, the Superintendence
and the University both played a key part, which, together with the museum
and the software developers allowed to realize noteworthy technological
innovations. Social and cultural as well as economic relations favoured
exchanges and collaborations fuelled by a common sense of belonging and
trust, and by a strong entrepreneurship that stimulated some relevant spin-offs
from the university context. Such an ability of culture to generate ideas and
innovations corroborates the assumptions laid out in literature on cultural and

59
60
61
62
63

Simon 2010, Bonacini 2012.
CIPFA 2009, Stroeker, Vogel 2012.
Europeana 2012.
Bertacchini, Morando 2013.
Lazzeretti et al. 2011, Casprini et al. 2014.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

963

creative economy, which assign creative industries a strategic role in facing the
crisis64.
The current challenge for the digitization of cultural heritage consists in
matching the respective interests of museums and software developers, on
one side, in reaping the economic benefits of digital collections, and those of
users, on the other side, in enjoying freedom of use and re-use. New emerging
technologies such as mobile platforms and the growing impact of social
networks are calling for new models to balance the curatorial approach with
a participative approach65. In this sense, digitization appears as an evolving
phenomenon that deserves to be put under constant observation.
The possibility of inferring general conclusions from the empirical case study
is limited by the methodology adopted. Therefore, comparisons with other
relevant experiences of leading cultural institutions can shed further light on
the challenges and implications of the digitization process. Lack of quantitative
data regarding the economic (e.g. number of downloads, revenues generated
for the museum and private partners) as well as cultural (e.g. interaction of
users with specific contents etc.) impacts of the digitization process is another
major limitation.
As regards further research directions, more comparative studies at an
international level are needed to provide an economic evaluation of the economic
and cultural benefits that museums, technology developers and users receive
from digital collections. This may benefit from the adoption of mixed methods
methodologies that combine multiple sources of empirical evidence such as
revenue flows, numbers of accesses and downloads, customer perceptions, etc.

References / Riferimenti bibliografici
Acidini C., Cappellini V. (2008), Reale e Virtuale nei Musei: Due Versioni a
Confronto, Bologna: Pitagora.
Adner R. (2006), Match your innovation strategy to your innovation ecosystem,
«Harvard Business Review», April 2006, <http://sjbae.pbworks.com/w/file/
fetch/60084211/Adner_2006_HBR.pdf>, 24.08.2016.
Anderson G., edited by (2004), Reinventing the museum: Historical and
contemporary perspectives on the paradigm shift, Walnut Creek (CA):
Altamira Press.
Bakhshi H., McVittie E., Simmie J. (2008), Creating Innovation: Do the Creative
Industries Support Innovation in the Wider Economy?, London: NESTA.

64
65

Bakhshi et al. 2008.
Pescarin et al. 2012; Proctor 2011.

964

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

Bakshi H., Throsby D. (2010), Culture of Innovation: An economic analysis of
innovation in arts and cultural organisations, London: NESTA.
Barni M., Bartolini F. (2004), Watermarking systems engineering: Enabling
digital assets security and other applications, New York: Marcel Dekker.
Barocchi P., Ragionieri G., a cura di (1982), Gli Uffizi: Quattro Secoli di una
Galleria, Firenze: Leo S. Olschki.
Barry A. (1999), On interactivity: Consumers, citizens and culture, in The
politics of display: Museums, Science, Culture, edited by S. Macdonald,
London: Routledge, pp. 98-117.
Benghozi P.J., Salvador E. (2013), Investment strategies in the value chain of
the book publishing sector: how and where the R&D someway matter in
creative industries?, XI International Conference Triple Helix (London, July
8-10, 2013).
Benghozi P.J., Paris T. (2007), The economics and business models of
prescription in the Internet, in Internet and Digital Economics. Principles,
Methods and Applications, edited by E. Brousseau, N. Curien, Cambridge
(MA): Cambridge University Press, pp. 291-310.
Bertacchini E., Morando F. (2013), The Future of Museums in the Digital
Age: New Models of Access and Use of Digital Collections, «International
Journal of Arts Management», 15, n. 2, pp. 60-72.
Besser H. (1997), The changing role of photographic collections with the
advent of digitization, in The Wired Museum: Emerging Technology and
Changing Paradigms, edited by K. Jones-Garmil, Washington DC: American
Association of Museums, pp. 115-128.
Bonacini E. (2012), Il museo partecipativo sul web: forme di partecipazione
dell’utente alla produzione culturale e alla creazione di valore culturale, «Il
Capitale Culturale. Studies on the Value of Cultural Heritage», n. 5, pp. 93-125,
<https://riviste.unimc.it/index.php/cap-cult/article/view/201/396>, 19.11.2016.
Bruno F., Bruno S., De Sensi G., Luchi M.-L., Mancuso S. and Muzzupappa M.
(2010), From 3D reconstruction to virtual reality: A complete methodology
for digital archaeological exhibition, «Journal of Cultural Heritage», n. 11,
pp. 42-49.
Bugge M.M., Øiestad S. (2014), The Micro-foundations of Regional
Branching – the Case of Digitization of Publishing, «European Planning
Studies», available in <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2014.970131>
, 24.08.2016.
Burnette A., Cherry R., Proctor N., Samis P. (2011), Getting On (not Under) the
Mobile 2.0 Bus: Emerging Issues in the Mobile Business Model, in Museums
and the Web 2011: Proceedings, edited by D. Bearman, J. Trant, Toronto:
Archive & Museum Informatics.
Camarero C., Garrido M. J. (2008), The role of technological and organizational
innovation in the relation between market orientation and performance in

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

965

cultural organizations, «European Journal of Innovation Management», 11,
n. 3, pp. 413-434.
Camarero C., Garrido M.J., Vicente E. (2011), How cultural organizations’ size
and funding influence innovation and performance: the case of museums.
«Journal of Cultural Economics», n. 35, pp. 244-267.
Cameron F. (2003), Digital Futures I: Museum collections, digital technologies,
and the cultural construction of knowledge, «Curator: The Museum
Journal», n. 46, pp. 325-340.
Cappellini V., edited by (1993), Uffizi Project. Firenze: Giunti.
Cappellini V., Barni M., Corsini M., De Rosa A., Piva A. (2003), ArtShop: an
art-oriented image-processing tool for cultural heritage applications, «The
Journal of Visualization and Computer Animation», n. 14, pp. 149-158.
Cappellini V., Constantinides A.G., Emiliani P. (1978), Digital Filters and their
Applications, London: Academic Press.
Cappellini V., Lunghi M., Nozzoli A. (1995), Progetto RAMA, «Gli Uffizi.
Studi e Ricerche», 26.
Cappellini M., De Rocco P., Serni L. (2010), Uffizi Touch®, in ACM 2010
MM’10 Proceedings of the international conference on Multimedia,
pp. 1511-1512.
Casprini E., Pucci, T., Zanni, L. (2014), Business model shifts: a case study on
firms that apply high technology to cultural goods, «Technology Analysis &
Strategic Management», 26, n. 2, pp. 171-187.
Chapman S. (2000), Laser technology for graffiti removal, «Journal of Cultural
Heritage», n. 1, pp. 75-78.
Chowdury G. (2013), Sustainability of digital libraries: A conceptual model,
in Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, International
Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries, TPDL 2013,
(Valletta, Malta, September 2013), edited by T. Aalberg, C. Papatheodorou,
M. Dobreva, G. Tsakonas, C.H. Farrigua, Berlin: Springer, pp. 1-12.
Cignoni P., Scopigno R. (2008), Sampled 3D models for CH applications: a
viable and enabling new medium or just a technological exercise?, «ACM J.
Comput. Cultur. Heritage», 1, n. 1, article 2 (June 2008).
CIPFA (Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy) (2009),
NUMERIC Project Study Report: Developing a statistical framework for
measuring the progress made in the digitisation of cultural materials and
content, Brussels: European Commission, <http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/
telearn-digicult/numeric-study_en.pdf>, 13.03.2013.
Comité des Sages (Reflection Group on Bringing Europe’s Cultural Heritage
Online) (2011), The New Renaissance, Brussels: Commission of the
European Communities.
Cunningham (2013), Hidden Innovation: Policy, Industry and the Creative
Sector, Brisbane: University of Queensland Press.

966

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

De Laurentis C. (2006), Digital knowledge exploitation: ICT, memory
institutions and innovation from cultural assets, «Journal of Technology
Transfer», 31, n. 1, pp. 77-89.
Din H., Hecht P., edited by (2007), The Digital Museum: A Think Guide,
Washington DC: American Association of Museums.
EC (2002), The DIGICULT Report: Technological Landscapes for
Tomorrow’s Cultural Economy: Unlocking the Value of Cultural Heritage,
Brussels: Commission of the European Communities, Directorate-General
for the Information Society, <http://www.digicult.info/pages/report.php>,
25.05.2012.
EC (2012), The Digital Agenda for Europe – Driving European Growth
Digitally, Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee
and the Committee of the Regions [COM(2012) 784], Brussels: European
Commission, 18 December.
Europeana (2012), The Commons: From Concept to Action, The Hague: Europeana
Foundation, <http://pro.europeana.eu/documents/858566/6f48965b-a584424d-b5a5-b8a0b2909888>, 21.08.2013.
Fletcher A., Lee M. (2012), Current social media uses and evaluation in
American museums, «Museum Management and Curatorship», 27, n. 5,
pp. 505-521.
Gueguen G., Hanlon A.M. (2009), A collaborative workflow for the digitization
of unique materials, «The Journal of Academic Librarianship», 35, n. 5,
pp. 468-474.
Guttertag D. (2010), Virtual reality: applications and implications for tourism,
«Tourism Management», 31, pp. 637-651.
Hellin-Hobbs Y. (2010), The constructivist museum and the Web, in EVA’10
Proceedings of the 2010 international conference on Electronic Visualisation
and the Arts, edited by A. Seal, J.P. Bowen, K. Ng, Swinton (UK): British
Computer Society, pp. 72-78.
Keene S. (1998), Digital Collections: Museums and the Information Age,
London: Routledge.
Kèfi H., Pallud J. (2011), The role of technologies in cultural mediation in
museums: an Actor- Network Theory view applied in France, «Museum
Management and Curatorship», 26, n. 3, pp. 273-289.
Kotler N., Kotler P. (2000) Can museums be all things to all people? Missions,
goals, and marketing’s role, «Museum Management and Curatorship», 18,
n. 3, pp. 271-287.
Lan P. (2004), Three new features of innovation brought about by information
and communication technology, «International Journal of Information
Technology and Management», 3, n. 1, pp. 3-19.

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

967

Lazzeretti L., Cinti T. (2009), Governance-specific Factors and Cultural
Clusters: the Case of the Museum Clusters in Florence, «Creative Industries
Journal», n. 2, 1 December, pp. 19-36.
Lazzeretti L., Capone F., Cinti T. (2011), Open innovation in city of art: The
case of laser technologies for conservation in Florence, «City, Culture and
Society», 2, n. 3, pp. 159-168.
Lazzeretti L., Sartori A., Innocenti N. (2015), The role of social media in
museum marketing communication strategies: The case of the Museum of
Natural History of the University of Florence, «International Review on
Public and Non-profit Marketing», 12, n. 3, pp. 267-283.
Lopez M., Margapoti I., Maragliano R., Bove R. (2010), The presence of Web
2.0 tools on museum websites: a comparative study between England, France,
Spain, Italy, and the USA, «Museum Management and Curatorship», 25, n.
2, pp. 238-249.
Marty P.F. (2011), My lost museum: User expectations and motivations for
creating personal digital collections on museum websites, «Library &
Information Science Research», 33, n. 3, pp. 211-219.
MIBAC (2012), CulturaItalia: Online la nuova versione del portale della cultura
italiana, Rome: MIBAC, 22 February 2012, <http://www.beniculturali.
it/mibac/export/MiBAC/sito-MiBAC/Contenuti/MibacUnif/Comunicati/
visualizza_asset.html_1470206078.html>, 14.09.2013.
Minghetti V., Moretti A., Micelli S. (2001), Reengineering the Museum’s Role
in the Tourism Value Chain: Towards an IT Business Model, «Journal of
Information Technology and Tourism», 4, n. 1, p. 131-143.
Muller K. (2002), Museums and virtuality, «Curator», 45, n. 1, pp. 21-33.
Navarrete T. (2013), Digital cultural heritage, in Handbook on the Economics
of Cultural Heritage, edited by I. Rizzo, A. Mignosa, Cheltenham (UK):
Edward Elgar, pp. 251-271.
Pescarin S., Pagano A., Wallergård M., Hupperetz W., Ray C. (2012),
Archeovirtual 2011: An evaluation approach to virtual museums,
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Virtual Systems and
Multimedia (VSMM), (2-5 September 2012), edited by IEEE, Milan, Italy,
<http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6365903/>, 24.08.2016.
Proctor N. (2011), Introduction, in Mobile Apps for Museum: The AAM
Guide to Planning and Strategy, edited by N. Proctor N., Washington DC:
American Association of Museums [online], <http://mobileappsformuseums.
wordpress.com/>, 20.12.2012.
Rayna T., Striukova L. (2014), The Impact of 3D Printing Technologies on
Business Model Innovation, in Digital Enterprise Design & Management,
edited by P.-J. Benghozi, D. Krob, A. Lonjon, H. Panetto, Springer
International Publishing, chapt. 11, pp. 119-123.
Sframeli M., Parallelo (2009), Percorsi di ricerca fra i capolavori delle gallerie
fiorentine. Nuove modalità di fruizione, in Forum PA ’09: Il Patrimonio

968

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

culturale: un’opportunità per superare la crisi, edited by MIBAC, Rome:
Ministero per i Beni e le Attività Culturali, pp. 18-19.
Simon N. (2010), The Participatory Museum, available at <http://www.
participatorymuseum.org/read/>, 24.08.2016.
Soren B.J., Lemelin N. (2004), “Cyberpals!/Les Cybercopains!”: A look at
online museum visitor experiences, «Curator: The Museum Journal», 47,
n. 1, pp. 55-83.
Stroeker N., Voegel R. (2012), Survey Report on Digitisation in European
Cultural Heritage Institutions 2012, Brussels: ENUMERATE Thematic
Network, available online at <http://www.enumerate.eu/fileadmin/
ENUMERATE/documents/ENUMERATE-Digitisation-Survey-2012.pdf>,
20.04. 2013.
Verwayen H., Arnoldus M., Kaufman P.B. (2011), The Problem of the Yellow
Milkmaid: A Business Model Perspective on Open Metadata, The Hague:
Europeana Foundation, Europeana whitepaper n. 2, <http://pro.europeana.eu/
documents/858566/2cbf1f78-e036-4088-af25-94684ff90dc5>, 15.06. 2012.
Vom Lehn D., Heath C. (2005), Accounting for new technology in museum
exhibitions, «International Journal of Arts Management», 7, n. 3, pp. 11-21.
Witcomb A. (2003), Re-imagining the Museum: Beyond the Mausoleum,
London: Routledge.
Zott C., Amit R. (2010), Designing your future business model: An activity
system perspective, «Long Range Planning», 43, pp. 216-226.

969

DIGITIZATION OF CULTURAL HERITAGE AND BUSINESS MODEL INNOVATION

Appendix

MUSEUM

Technology
developers

Technology
developers

Re--use
Re

Analogue collections

Digital applications

Digital collections
Metadata

Access and fruition

Digitization

Distribu
Di
stribution
tion

Creative
industries

General
users

Fig. 1. Museum digital value chain (source: our elaboration)

Periods

Technological
trajectories

Theoretical

automated
cataloguing

multimedia

3D modelling

2 d digitalization

1970
audio tour

digital catalogue
1980

Positivism

interactive display

1990

reconstructive VR
model

‘linear’ digital
collection
online VR models

2000

‘post modern’ digital
collection

Semantic
2010

multimedia tours

Web 2.0 spaces,
bookmarking

Postmodernism

interpretive VR
model

mobile (onsite and
online) application
Fig. 2. A multiple and partially intersecting techno-cultural trajectories in digitization (source:
our elaboration)

970

LUCIANA LAZZERETTI, ANDREA SARTORI

Critical analysis

Curatorial
interpretation

Aesthetic
appreciation

Public fruition
Diagnostics

Restoration

Fig. 3. The functions performed by Uffizi Touch within the cultural heritage “value chain”
(source: our elaboration)

Fig. 4. Picture from a virtual exhibition organized by Centrica at Shanghai (2010) (<http://
www.centrica.it>)

Direttore / Editor
Massimo Montella

Co-Direttori / Co-Editors
Tommy D. Andersson, University of Gothenburg, Svezia
Elio Borgonovi, Università Bocconi di Milano
Rosanna Cioffi, Seconda Università di Napoli
Stefano Della Torre, Politecnico di Milano
Michela Di Macco, Università di Roma ‘La Sapienza’
Daniele Manacorda, Università degli Studi di Roma Tre
Serge Noiret, European University Institute
Tonino Pencarelli, Università di Urbino "Carlo Bo"
Angelo R. Pupino, Università degli Studi di Napoli L'Orientale
Girolamo Sciullo, Università di Bologna

Comitato editoriale / Editorial Office
Giuseppe Capriotti, Alessio Cavicchi, Mara Cerquetti, Francesca Coltrinari,
Patrizia Dragoni, Pierluigi Feliciati, Valeria Merola, Enrico Nicosia,
Francesco Pirani, Mauro Saracco, Emanuela Stortoni

Comitato scientifico / Scientific Committee
Dipartimento di Scienze della formazione, dei beni culturali e del turismo
Sezione di beni culturali “Giovanni Urbani” – Università di Macerata
Department of Education, Cultural Heritage and Tourism
Division of Cultural Heritage “Giovanni Urbani” – University of Macerata
Giuseppe Capriotti, Mara Cerquetti, Francesca Coltrinari, Patrizia Dragoni,
Pierluigi Feliciati, Maria Teresa Gigliozzi, Valeria Merola, Susanne Adina Meyer,
Massimo Montella, Umberto Moscatelli, Sabina Pavone, Francesco Pirani,
Mauro Saracco, Michela Scolaro, Emanuela Stortoni, Federico Valacchi,
Carmen Vitale

