Multimodal Technologies
and Interaction

Editorial

Digital Cultural Heritage
Cristina Portalés 1, * , João M. F. Rodrigues 2 , Alexandra Rodrigues Gonçalves 3 , Ester Alba 4 and
Jorge Sebastián 4
1
2
3
4

*

Institute of Robotics and Information and Communication Technologies (IRTIC), Universitat de València,
46980 València, Spain
LARSyS & Instituto Superior de Engenharia, University of the Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal;
jrodrig@ualg.pt
Escola Superior de Gestão, Hotelaria e Turismo, University of the Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal;
alexandra.goncalves@cultalg.gov.pt
Department of Art History, Universitat de València, 46010 València, Spain; esther.alba@uv.es (E.A.);
jorge.sebastian@uv.es (J.S.)
Correspondence: cristina.portales@uv.es; Tel.: +34-963-543-557

Received: 7 September 2018; Accepted: 10 September 2018; Published: 11 September 2018




1. Introduction
Most contemporary thinkers agree that we are going through a time of historical change, building a
different concept and model of social interrelation. Our ways of life and work have changed, as have
the ways in which we communicate and relate to each other.
Likewise, an increasing consensus indicates the need to reconfigure traditional social and cultural
structures. The Internet, the virtual social networks, and the Information and Communication
Technologies (ICTs) have coalesced into a new collective consciousness—a world intercommunicated
from the local to the global [1]. The fusion of tradition, culture, history, and legacy with technology,
innovation, and interaction provides an attractive system that serves both as an artistic expression and
as a fundamental tool for diffusion in cultural institutions [2]. For instance, the usage of interactive
technologies such as virtual reality (VR) or augmented reality (AR), combined with multidimensional
or multimodal representations [3], provides a significant novelty. User interaction offers a broader
perspective, making people more aware of their actions, helping them become the true center of
the application. It also enables interactive artistic expression through alternative realities, as well as
narration supported by the use of virtual avatars [4].
In a certain way, this new trend involves a break with former negative developments within
cultural policies of exhibition and museum spaces. The 1980s saw the rise of emblematic museums,
considered more as a spectacle than as a space for the protection of heritage assets. In them,
the architectural object mattered more than the ability to reach the public. The rise of contemporary
art museums in the 1990s led to a disdainful look at the museum as a conservative art institution,
and favored their understanding as mere cultural centers with multi-purpose rooms. Fortunately,
this discourse has been superseded; there is now a greater concern to work with collections in order to
build new resources and new museum narratives. ICTs are an effective and necessary ally in these
tasks [5].
Currently, museums are considered as institutions based on the transmission of knowledge,
whose priority is to set culture within the reach of every society, as centers of digital exchange,
and as open spaces of intergenerational dialogue [6–9]. In this paradigm shift, the evaluation of
the user experience is increasingly important. Improving the understanding of cultural sites or
museums through mobile applications requires a complex but necessary task: the assessment of
digital applications and their reception by users. Monitoring the acquisition of knowledge is a crucial

Multimodal Technologies and Interact. 2018, 2, 58; doi:10.3390/mti2030058

www.mdpi.com/journal/mti

Multimodal Technologies and Interact. 2018, 2, 58

2 of 5

tool in order to propose relevant recommendations for the design of digital experiences for cultural,
educational, and recreational purposes [10].
In the heritage field, one can speak of art labs or history labs, but more specifically of
heritage labs as a process of innovation in society/heritage relations, in a constant search for
strong social involvement [11]. This search for the creation of cultural, social, and political
systems is based on favoring fair and sustainable practices through experiential and participatory
approaches. Awareness-raising processes are becoming commonly generated through innovative
access to information systems or in the creation of new cultural containers. A clear example is the
creation of cultural routes that are developed on the territory, while also offering rich spatio-temporal
information, visualizing and helping to understand the historical processes, the changes, and evolution
of heritage sites.
In recent years, UNESCO [12] has privileged the concept of “integral heritage”, which exceeds
the isolated building or monument [13]. This understanding of heritage as an integral reality
requires a collective perception and the establishment of cultural networks that expand the range of
perception, combining monuments, heritage sites, museums, natural landscapes, cultural landscapes,
ethnographic realities, historical sites, collective memory, and cultural routes [14]. The goal is the
public appreciation of the heritage, the understanding of the cultural and educational dimension in a
single universe, interconnected in a set of multinodular networks. In this objective, new technologies
can become an important and effective ally.
Within this context, this Special Issue was devised on a set a shared assumptions.
Cultural Heritage (CH) is an essential expression of the wealth and diversity of human cultures,
and therefore its documentation, interpretation, restoration, and dissemination are considered to
be crucial tasks. Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) provide researchers with
powerful tools to deal with the digital acquisition, storage, conservation, recreation, reconstruction,
and representation of CH assets, both tangible and intangible. Every day, new initiatives are
materializing this symbiosis between ICT and Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH)—for example,
for the accurate multi-dimensional documentation of our cultural legacy, the processing of large
amounts of data to identify new correlations among digital heterogeneous collections, or the increase
of CH awareness by means of advanced representation and interaction (e.g., visual, tangible, etc.)
approaches. Due to the increasing capabilities of new technologies that triggers the growing complexity
in the digital documentation and representation of CH, new challenges arise regarding its preservation
over time, re-use, and study.
2. Papers Published in This Special Issue
The essays received, reviewed, and accepted here study these topics from different perspectives,
some of them technological in nature (e.g., ICT, architecture, etc.), while others approach issues from
the Humanities and the Social Sciences (e.g., art history, conservation, etc.). Six are original papers,
one is a communication, and one a review. They all unpack the relevance of digital CH in the current
research panorama. In the following paragraphs, an outline and short discussion on these papers is
provided, highlighting their main findings.
Multimodal and Interactive technologies play an important role in the documentation,
preservation, and dissemination of cultural assets. For instance, by means of AR and VR technologies,
cultural assets can be relocated and recontextualized. This can help users to understand their original
location, scale, and function, thus better relating them to the cultural identities that originated them,
as shown by some papers in this issue. “TinajAR: An Edutainment Augmented Reality Mirror for the
Dissemination and Reinterpretation of Cultural Heritage” [15] describes a system dealing with ceramic
heritage, designed to be both an edutainment application and an artistic piece. TinajAR features an AR
mirror metaphor [16,17] (i.e., users see themselves immersed in an augmented environment). As an
artistic expression, TinajAR seeks to reinterpret an ancient type of cellar called a calado, which was
used to store wine in northern Spain. It is an example of AR opening up a complete set of new

Multimodal Technologies and Interact. 2018, 2, 58

3 of 5

possibilities for CH, including the virtual transformation of physical elements. “A Novel Immersive
VR Game Model for Recontextualization in Virtual Environments: The µVRModel” [18] puts forward
a new model for VR games, named µVR. By combining real-walking techniques and an adaptive,
game-driven, multi-scale progression, it allows the creation of immersive VR applications targeting
re-contextualization activities that require users to relocate virtual cultural objects in their former
locations. The µ operator performs a liquid and adaptive miniaturization of the user each time they
correctly place a given item onto its target location. Furthermore, the model aims to minimize motion
sickness while fully exploiting the physical tracked area and augmenting the understanding of user
experiences within the virtual world.
In a different way, another paper involving relocation and recontextualization is “Behind the 3D
Scene: A GIS Approach for Managing the Chronological Information of Historic Buildings” [19]. In this
case, chronological recontextualization plays an important role. Historic buildings are representations
of cultural systems over time. Therefore, it is important to shed light on the chronological information
about any given historical building, and thus show the descriptions of its different (re)compositions for
different moments. The authors argue that this allows a holistic understanding of historical changes
and, in turn, supports the planning of restoration projects, providing a complete documentary archive.
They also propose a methodology that makes use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and
develops a digital “container” as a 3D digital model for the archiving of a building’s chronological
information. It covers both the geometric and spatial aspects, as well as the historical sources and their
reliability. The core technology for this study is architectural 3D modeling, so relevant in the CH sector.
This is also highlighted in the paper entitled “A Review of Heritage Building Information Modeling
(H-BIM)” [20], which offers an extensive review focused on Heritage BIM (H-BIM)—a kind of 3D
model that follows the BIM standard, contextualized for the heritage sector. The authors show that the
complex modeling of cultural heritage through commercial BIM software leads to the consideration
of the H-BIM concept, which pursues the modeling of architectural elements according to artistic,
historical, and constructive typologies. The paper reviews the literature on H-BIM and its effective
implementation in the cultural heritage sector, also exploring the effectiveness and usefulness of the
existing methodologies.
Mobile phones are being increasingly used in the context of museums and exhibition spaces,
maybe because of their light weight, their increased computational capabilities (which allow
embedding interactive applications with rich graphics), or the fact that most people have their
own device. Among other reasons, they are highly useful in generating new museum narratives,
as highlighted by the paper “Flow, Staging, Wayfinding, Personalization: Evaluating User Experience
with Mobile Museum Narratives” [21]. Its main challenge is to report on the evaluation of prototype
narrative “guides” based on mobile devices, designed, developed, and implemented as part of a
research project at the Acropolis Museum in Athens, Greece. It aimed to make museums more
attractive and relevant to a wider range of visitors by creating personalized interactive storytelling
experiences. The authors highlight the complexity of understanding users’ experience, and what
makes it effective in the rich context of a cultural setting. They underscore the relevance of proper
design, monitoring, and evaluation, where different profiles of visitors and users need to be considered.
Their conclusions are in some ways aligned with the paper “Enhancing the Appreciation of Traditional
Chinese Painting Using Interactive Technology” [22], which reports on field studies of a prototype tablet
application about Chinese painting. First, authors present a cultural appreciation study where they
explore the specific approach of cross-cultural aesthetics, mapping potential insights for a prototype
design. Secondly, they show the design of a tablet application and the results of focus group studies to
explore the technology that supports cross-cultural audiences’ aesthetic appreciation and engagement
with traditional Chinese painting. Their aim is to offer valuable transferrable insights about the design
of interactive technology that enables the appreciation of traditional art.
This framework raises new challenges as well as the establishment of new canons. Such a debate
is introduced in the paper “Canon, Value, and Cultural Heritage: New Processes of Assigning Value in

Multimodal Technologies and Interact. 2018, 2, 58

4 of 5

the Postdigital Realm” [23]. It aims to provide some reflections on the mechanisms of canon formation
in the context of the web as a new laboratory of cultural production. It also intends to feed the critical
discussion about how the so-called postcanonical age unfolds, under various forms: hypercanonization,
socialdecanonization, and transcanonization. The author opens interesting questions for this debate,
such as “who owns the cultural values in the postdigital society?” or “who holds now the authority
and power to establish the new canons and legitimizing discourses?”
Finally, “Interactive Tools for the Preservation, Dissemination and Study of Silk Heritage—An
Introduction to the SILKNOW Project” [24] provides an introduction to a project that will produce an
intelligent computational system in order to improve the understanding of European silk heritage.
To that end, it will make use of different interactive technologies, such as a web portal with a
multilingual thesaurus, spatio-temporal visualizations of objects related to silk heritage, or a virtual
loom that is able to digitally weave ancient silk textiles.
In summary, this Special Issue explores the role of new and interactive technologies in digital
cultural heritage, including virtual reality, augmented reality, mobile technologies, web-based
networks, GIS, or 3D assets representation, among others. It addresses the promise of these technologies
for museums, helping to bring CH content closer to the public while enhancing their experiences
thereof. As editors of this Special Issue, we feel that our goals have been successfully met, as the papers
provide very diverse reflections of the current research trends in this area.
Author Contributions: Writing—Original Draft Preparation, C.P., E.A., J.S.; Writing—Review & Editing, C.P.,
J.M.F.R., A.R.G., E.A., J.S.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The editors thank the various contributors, reviewers and journal staff at Multimodal
Technologies and Interaction for making this Special Issue a success.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

Alba Pagán, E. Fundamentos para la gestión del patrimonio cultural. In El Desarrollo Territorial Valenciano:
Reflexiones en Torno a Sus Claves; Universitat de València: València, Spain, 2014.
De Tapol, B. La necesaria adaptación de la conservación preventiva al concepto de sostenibilidad con especial
atención a las herramientas de gestión. Patrim. Cult. Esp. 2013, 7, 81–90.
Portalés, C.; Casas, S.; Alonso-Monasterio, P.; Viñals, M.J. Multi-dimensional acquisition, representation, and
interaction of cultural heritage tangible assets: An insight on tourism applications. In Handbook of Research on
Technological Developments for Cultural Heritage and Etourism Applications; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2018;
pp. 72–95.
Stovel, H. Monitoring world heritage. In World Heritage Centre and ICCROM, Rome (World Heritage Paper No. 10);
UNESCO World Heritage Centre and ICCROM: Paris, France, 2004.
Desvallées, A.; Mairesse, F. Key Concepts of Museology; Armand Colin: Paris, France, 2010.
Adie, B.A.; Hall, C.M. Who visits world heritage? A comparative analysis of three cultural sites.
J. Heritage Tour. 2017, 12, 67–80. [CrossRef]
Ashworth, G.J.; van der Aa, B.J. Strategy and Policy for the World Heritage Convention: Goals, Practices and
Future Solutions. Available online: http://www.mu.edu.et/iphc/images/liblary/Heritage/Heritage_
Culture_and_Tourism/Managing_World_Heritage_Sites.pdf#page=174 (accessed on 7 September 2018).
Boyd, S. Cultural and heritage tourism in canada: Opportunities, principles and challenges. Tour. Hosp. Res.
2002, 3, 211–233. [CrossRef]
Timothy, D.J.; Boyd, S.W. Heritage tourism in the 21st century: Valued traditions and new perspectives.
J. Heritage Tour. 2006, 1, 1–16. [CrossRef]
Shipley, R.; Kovacs, J.F. Good governance principles for the cultural heritage sector: Lessons from
international experience. Corp. Gov. Int. J. Bus. Soc. 2008, 8, 214–228. [CrossRef]
Sebastián Lozano, J. Digital Art History at the Crossroads. Available online: https://edoc.hu-berlin.de/
bitstream/handle/18452/19405/Lozano%20final.pdf (accessed on 7 September 2018).

Multimodal Technologies and Interact. 2018, 2, 58

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

5 of 5

Managing Cultural World Heritage. Available online: https://whc.unesco.org/en/managing-culturalworld-heritage/ (accessed on 7 September 2018).
Ryan, J.; Silvanto, S. A brand for all the nations: The development of the world heritage brand in emerging
markets. Mark. Intell. Plan. 2011, 29, 305–318. [CrossRef]
Arpin, R. Notre Patrimoine, un Présent Du Passé. Available online: http://bel.uqtr.ca/1239/1/6-19-68120060117-1.pdf (accessed on 7 September 2018).
Martínez, B.; Casas, S.; Vidal-González, M.; Vera, L.; García-Pereira, I. Tinajar: An edutainment augmented
reality mirror for the dissemination and reinterpretation of cultural heritage. Multimodal Technol. Interact.
2018, 2, 33. [CrossRef]
Giner Martínez, F.; Portalés Ricart, C. The augmented user: A wearable augmented reality interface.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM’05), Ghent,
Belgium, 3–7 October 2005.
Portalés, C.; Gimeno, J.; Casas, S.; Olanda, R.; Martínez, F.G. Interacting with augmented reality mirrors.
In Handbook of Research on Human-Computer Interfaces, Developments, and Applications; IGI Global: Hershey,
PA, USA, 2016.
Fanini, B.; Pagano, A.; Ferdani, D. A novel immersive vr game model for recontextualization in virtual
environments: The µvrmodel. Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 20. [CrossRef]
Saygi, G.; Agugiaro, G.; Hamamcioglu-Turan, M. Behind the 3D scene: A gis approach for managing the
chronological information of historic buildings. Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 26. [CrossRef]
López, F.; Lerones, P.; Llamas, J.; Gómez-García-Bermejo, J.; Zalama, E. A review of heritage building
information modeling (h-bim). Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 21. [CrossRef]
Roussou, M.; Katifori, A. Flow, staging, wayfinding, personalization: Evaluating user experience with mobile
museum narratives. Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 32. [CrossRef]
Zhao, S.; Kirk, D.; Bowen, S.; Wright, P. Enhancing the appreciation of traditional Chinese painting using
interactive technology. Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 16. [CrossRef]
Rodríguez-Ortega, N. Canon, value, and cultural heritage: New processes of assigning value in the
postdigital realm. Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 25. [CrossRef]
Portalés, C.; Sebastián, J.; Alba, E.; Sevilla, J.; Gaitán, M.; Ruiz, P.; Fernández, M. Interactive tools
for the preservation, dissemination and study of silk heritage—An introduction to the silknow project.
Multimodal Technol. Interact. 2018, 2, 28. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

