DOCUMENTATION AND ANALYSIS OF CULTURAL HERITAGE BY
PHOTOGRAMETRIC METHODS AND GIS: A CASE STUDY
G. Toz, Z. Duran

ITU, Civil Engineering Faculty, 80626 Maslak Istanbul, Turkey – (tozg, duranza)@itu.edu.tr
Commission V, WG V/4
KEY WORDS: Photogrammetry, Cultural Heritage, GIS, Visualization, Internet/Web, Virtual Reality

ABSTRACT:
Turkey is one of the rare countries with a rich cultural heritage. We have been left with a historic heritage covering the centuries
from pre-historic to modern times, which have left the marks of their civilizations on the lands of Anatolia. Therefore these riches
should be preserved and left to the next generations with the care such treasures deserve. We have to be aware of the responsibility
of leaving these treasures to the next generations as well as displaying them to the tourists. The saving methods of these treasures are
supported by modern technology. Using these methods enables us to increase the efficiency and impact of the saving process. Using
the advanced technologies in the disciplines other than architecture and by cooperation among the different fields, the future of
cultural heritage can be guaranteed in order to save the historical objects and areas. It is necessary to organize the plans and works
covering the necessary technical documents of the objects and lands to preserve these objects and lands. With the help of these
documents, it will be possible to reach the desired information for the works carried on these objects and lands. The information
system generated by the use of digital photogrammetry and Geographical Information System together will enable any person
interested in saving the cultural heritage to reach the necessary data. As mentioned above, integration of photogrammetry and GIS
leads to the efficient use of data, analysis and presentation opportunities, which are very important for saving the cultural heritage.
The aim of this study is to use this technology for the photogrammetric documentation of the cultural heritage and to enable the use
of the documentation by using GIS.
1. INTRODUCTION
Architecture is a substantial part of our cultural heritage. But
whereas other elements of our cultural heritage may be
protected by putting them behind a glass in a museum,
architectural monuments are widely used and endangered by
long term influences like traffic or air pollution or destructive
events causing heavy damage like earthquakes, fire or war etc.
But by all means when monuments are seriously damaged, or
completely destroyed, the amount and quality of any surviving
documentation becomes highly important.
Therefore it is necessary to document the actual state of the
architectural monuments in a manner, which opens the
opportunity to detect continuous damage by change detection
techniques and to restore the monument in case of heavy
damage. Before starting to acquire new data on the monument
already existing data sources have to be obtained, e.g. existing
plans of previous restorations, ancient pictures or
documentation's of architectural research projects.
The 3D reconstruction of buildings has been an active research
topic in Computer Vision as well as in Digital Photogrammetry
in recent years. Three-dimensional building models are
increasingly necessary for urban planning, tourism, etc. (Suveg
and Vosselman, 2000).
Three-dimensional photo-models help us to understand spatial
objects, even if they are not accessible for us. Using photomodels from existing objects can make it easier for us to
understand complex spatial structures. With the help of
methods coming from virtual reality we can link additional
information in the form of text or sound sequences to our photomodels. An architect, for example, can generate an interactive
three-dimensional information system based on a photo-model,

which describes and visualizes an important building (Dorffner
and Forkert, 1998).
Visualization efforts in Photogrammetry do not have a long
history. In the beginning of 90’s the first photogrammetric
attempts were mainly focused on the use of CAD software and
the generic visualization tools they had to offer. Most of the
research efforts at that time were concentrated to automating
the data acquisition and processing through Digital
Photogrammetry concepts, thus little attention was paid on how
to add value to the data.
2.

TEXTURE MAPPING AND VISUALIZATION

A three-dimensional photo-model is an object model where the
texture information is taken from photographs or other optically
working recording systems. It consists of two parts. One part is
the three-dimensional object model in which the shape of the
object surface is stored. Adjoining surface patches
approximates the object itself. The second part is the phototexture, which is transformed to the patches (Dorffner and
Forkert, 1998).
To visualize the derived model the photogrammetric data are
converted to VRML Virtual Reality Modeling Language).
VRML is a format for 3D data with features like hierarchical
transformations, light sources, viewpoints, geometry,
animation, fog, mate-rial properties and texture mapping (Carey
and Bell, 1997). VRML is an open format that has become
popular because of its suitability for publishing 3D data on the
World Wide Web. For this reason there is a lot of software
available that can handle VRML. This software allows a userfriendly interactive examination and visualization of the data.
The conversion to VRML is fully automatic and consists of two

parts: geometry conversion and texture mapping. In the
geometric part the object coordinates and the topology
information are converted. (Heuvel, 1998)
3. PHOTOGRAMMETRY AND CULTURAL
HERITAGE
Developments in the sciences of photogrammetry and image
processing over the past decade or so have seen an increase in
the automation of the data collection process, ranging from high
precision industrial applications through to simple solutions for
non-traditional users (for example, 3D Builder and Photo
Modeler). In addition, systems that use imagery from consumer
digital and analogue video systems and sequences of images
have almost automated the creation of three-dimensional (3D)
models (as has the development of 3D laser scanners (Ogleby,
1999).
4.

CASE STUDY

Rollei D7 metric camera. The images were not taken normal
case. The control points (approx. 35) were realized by using
geodetic techniques. The control points were measured using
Pentax total station.
In this step the image coordinates and lines were measured
manually each image. The process of tie point measurement has
to be done interactively and therefore is very time consuming.
Together line measurement the object topology was specified
and thereby the coplanarity of the lines bordering a face. This
topological information must be stored alongside the point
identifiers and coordinates in the data set. In our study we used
the low-cost program Photo Modeler by Eos Systems Inc. for
point measurement and definition of topology (Eos Systems
Inc., 1997). The photogrammetric evaluation was done partly.
Afterwards creating 3D model can be transferred to DXF
format and then merged in AutoCAD. Fig.2 shows an example
of photogrammetric evaluation and 3D wire frame model of the
monastery model of Christ Pantepoptes (Duran and Toz, 2002).

In this study the monastery of Christ Pantepoptes (Eski Imaret-i
Atik Cami) in Fatih was selected to sample building for the case
study (Figure. 1) Fatih is situated at the slopes of the fourth hill
in the Historic Peninsula in Istanbul. The district starts at the
shores of the Golden Horn-Haliç, and extends up the slopes
along the Atatürk Boulevard. Retaining walls reaching up to 15
meters are to be found at some spots along the Atatürk
Boulevard, as well as dykes and terraces dating from the
Byzantine period. These structures present an interesting view
in the direction of Galata, Golden Horn, and the Historic
Peninsula. (Gülersoy et all, 2001).
The monastery of Christ Pantepoptes is known to have been
either founded or renovated by Anna Dalassena, mother of
Alexius I Comnenus (1081-1118). Built on the summit of the
City's fourth hill, above the underground cisterns, it commands
a magnificent view of the Golden Horn and the Bosphorus. The
location explains the name Pantepoptes, i.e. the All-Seeing. The
church is of the cross-inscribed type with four columns
supporting a dome. Its ground plan is that of a three-aisled
church with two narthexes. Though in a state of neglect, the
elegantly proportioned building has retained the fine decorative
brick work of the exterior, the shallow niches, the arches
framing single or triple windows, the arcade of the gallery on
the west side, the meander and rosette friezes, as well as
sections of the cornices carved with palmettes.

Figure 2. Examples of the photogrammetric evaluation and 3D
wire frame model of the monastery model of Christ Pantepoptes
4.1 Rendering and Animation
Figure 1. The sample building
4.1 Photogrammetric Documentation
Detailed geometric information of the sample building was
derived from architectural photogrammetry and geodetic
measurements. (El Din, 2000). The images were taken with

After digital data were merged for 3D modeling in AutoCAD, it
was saved as .dxf file. This file was imported into Max. After
editing photos of the monastery of Christ Pantepoptes (Eski
Imaret-i Atik Cami) in Adobe Photoshop, they were stacked on
surfaces of building by using mapping technique in material
editor of 3D StudioMAX. Stacking photos on surface of the

monastery made the building seem realistic (Ozaslan and Seker,
2001).
After creating 3D model and stacking photos on the building,
the last step was rendering (Fig. 3). Rendering a scene or
scenes (animation) by using 3D StudioMAX is possible. It is
possible to export the project into file formats jpg, bmp, eps, tif
or into video formats mov, avi, by using 3D StudioMAX’s
render editor. In this project lots of scenes were rendered into
bmp format and a short animation in avi format was created as
an example.

Figure 5. 3D model of the monastery of Christ Pantepoptes
(Eski Imaret-i Atik Cami) in ArcView.
Figure 3. 3D textured model of the monastery of Christ
Pantepoptes (Eski Imaret-i Atik Cami) in 3D Studio MAX.

In this project 3D textured model was also created in AutoCAD
and in Arc View environment (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5).
4.2 GIS
GIS is an important tool for urban planning. GIS includes
software and hardware tools, and a group of procedures
elaborated to facilitate the capture, edition, administration,
manipulation, analysis, modelling, representation and the exit of
spatial referenced and semantic data, to solve any type of
planning, administration, storage, and further information
concerning the problem. GIS technology greatly facilitates the
inventory, evaluation, preservation, and documentation of
archaeological sites and historical structures. As heritage
conservation becomes more holistic and historic sites are
steadily becoming integrated with the surrounding landscapes,
GIS has been recognized as a critical component in the
development of virtual historic collections and archives.

Figure 4. 3D textured model of the monastery of Christ
Pantepoptes (Eski Imaret-i Atik Cami) in AutoCAD.

The package we use here is Arc View which is amongst the
most popular and flexible GIS software. We have two kinds of
databases: the one who has the graphical and geometrical data
and the one who has the alphanumeric data related to the
graphical data. The first one will be generated from the
photogrametric digital system or from other graphical external
files (like digitized plans, amateur photographs etc.). The
second one will be handled with the DBMS ACCESS. Both
databases will be linked and managed together by the GIS
software Arc View 3.2, creating the information system.
Objects are being built by linking spatial data (point, lines or
polygons that are defined by geometry and topology) with nongraphic information in GIS. Coverage, also called as layer, is
the basic unit of storage in Arc/Info. In this study Arc/Info has
been used for the establishment of topology of the coverage.
Then the coverage has been imported to Arc View software.
This software has been produced as a vector based GIS but also
it has limited use of raster base data as well. In addition to

several querying and analysis advantage, the result of these
attributes.
Also some of non-topographic information for feature
(attributes) such quarter name, street name, door number,
building functionality, basement, medium floor, roof, total
floor, building condition, registration, building name,
construction date, financer, architecture etc. were stored in the
database table. Afterwards digital terrain model (DTM) of study
area was being produced and captured with orthophoto in Arc
View software. 3D city modelling allows a person to
interactively fly and walk-through a given urban space. This
technology has already been applied to several cities
worldwide; however, it has usually been implemented for
limited sections of the city only. For these reasons 3D city
model of study area was being produced and linked
photographs and .avi files in this project (Fig. 6).

documentation of architectural cultural heritage. The pictures
can be used for the documentation of pending and actual
damages on buildings and sculptures. The information system
will help the public to form a view on the development process
of their urban environment. The awareness for the importance
of the cultural heritage will be raised.
REFERENCES
Carey, R., Bell, G., “The Annotated VRML 2.0 Reference
Manual”, Addison Wesley Developers Press, 1997.
Dorffner, L. and Forkert, G, 1998, “Generation and
Visualization Of 3D Photo-Models Using Hybrid Block
Adjustment with Assumptions on the Object Shape” ISPRS
Journal Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Vol.53, pp.369378.
Duran, Z., Toz, G., 2002. Integration of GIS for Cultural
Heritage Documentation, XXX IAHS World Congress on
Housing, Housing Construction, An Interdisciplinary Task,
September 9-13, Portekiz, Vol.I, p.597-605.
Eos Systems Inc., 1997. PhotoModeler — User Manual
Version 3.0. Eos Systems Inc, 12th Ed., Vancouver.
Gülersoy, Z., N., Tezer, A., Yiğiter, R., Ahunbay, Z., 2001 –
Zeyrek a Study in Conservation, Istanbul Technical University,
Faculty of Architecture, Istanbul, Pp. 37-38.
Nour El Din, M., O., Al Khalil, Grussenmeyer, P., Koehl, M.,
2000. Building Reconstruction Based On Three-Dimensional
Photo-Models And Topologic Approaches, The Mediterranean
Surveyor in the New Millennium, MALTA.

Figure 6. 3D city model of study area and linked photograph
5. CONCLUSION
The increasing use of close-range photogrammetry techniques
for recording historical buildings and objects worldwide
motivates the development of new tools for data acquisition and
3D modelling.
3D photo-models are best suited to give a clear and detailed
impression of existing situations. For the generation of 3D
photo-models digital images are needed.
The texture applied to the three-dimensional object model is, as
far as available, taken from the photographs. If threedimensional photo-models are stored in VRML-format, it is
possible to visualize and animate them on the Internet. These
models can be used easily for generating an information system.
Therefore, 3D photo-models show up to be a new product in the
area of planning and documentation.
It is useful to create 3D models both for planning, projects and
also for presentation and visualization. In this study both
photogrammetric and geodetic measurements were used
together to create 3D model. It was seen that 3D Studio MAX is
quite professional for creating 3D models and also for creating
animations by using these models. So it is very complex to use
MAX and it takes a long time learning to use it functionally.
An Architectural Information System with the modules and
special archives provides the possibility for the comprehensive

Ogleby, C.L., 1999. From Rubble to Virtual Reality:
Photogrammetry and the Virtual World of Ancient Ayutthaya,
Thailand, Photogrammetric Record, 16(94): 651–670.
Ozaslan, O. Seker, D. Z., 2001, “Virtual Tour on 3D Model of
ITU Ayazaga Campus”, Fourth Turkish – German Joint
geodetic Days, 3-6 April 2001, Berlin
Suveg, I., Vosselman, G., 2000, “3D Reconstruction of
Building Models”, IAPRS, Vol. XXXIII, Amsterdam.
Van den Heuvel, F.A., 1998. ”3D Reconstruction from a Single
Image Using Geometric Constraints.” ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing, Vol.53 pp. 354–368.

