Planning Practice and Research

ISSN: 0269-7459 (Print) 1360-0583 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cppr20

From Territory to Smartphone: Smart Fruition
of Cultural Heritage for Dynamic Tourism
Development
Chiara Garau
To cite this article: Chiara Garau (2014) From Territory to Smartphone: Smart Fruition of Cultural
Heritage for Dynamic Tourism Development, Planning Practice and Research, 29:3, 238-255, DOI:
10.1080/02697459.2014.929837
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/02697459.2014.929837

Published online: 20 Jun 2014.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 3736

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 28 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cppr20

Planning, Practice & Research, 2014
Vol. 29, No. 3, 238–255, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02697459.2014.929837

ARTICLE

From Territory to Smartphone: Smart
Fruition of Cultural Heritage for
Dynamic Tourism Development
CHIARA GARAU

Abstract
Augmented reality is a new technology that merges the virtual and the real worlds and offers
important support in all planning processes. Using mobile devices, planning information can be
implemented with smart and participative solutions for a dynamic fruition of cultural heritage
[Brondi, R., Carrozzino, M., Tecchia, F., & Bergamasco, M. (2012) Mobile augmented reality for
cultural dissemination, in: P. Nesi & R. Santucci (Eds), ECLAP 2012 Conference on Information
Technologies for Performing Arts, Media and Entertainment, pp. 113– 118 (Firenze: Firenze
University Press); Hatzelhoffer, L., et al. (2012) Smart City in Practice: Innovation Lab Between
Vision and Reality (Jovis). Technologies are important tools because they make a city smart by
making concrete contributions to trigger dynamic processes of place-based development. Three
important factors improve urban planning fruition: participation in the early stages of listening and
co-design; enlightened governance and new technology. This paper (1) presents the actual
possibilities and challenges of augmented reality in the field of cultural heritage, (2) describes a
simulation of one case study in a neighbourhood in Cagliari (Italy), by proposing customized paths
with the aim of promoting cultural tourism and (3) explains the benefits of using augmented reality in
touristic and place-based processes based on the case study.
Keywords: augmented reality; cultural heritage; tourist experience; volunteered geographic
information; cultural heritage tourism

1. Introduction
Numerous studies have clearly shown that within urban planning, communication
is undergoing a profound renewal because of a joint set of factors: namely,
emerging and ubiquitous technological developments, a greater citizen awareness
in safeguarding the territory (Blondiaux, 2008; Lewanski, 2013) and the rise of
bottom-up models in the planning process enabling interactive, incremental and
inclusive processes (Jenkins, 2007; Rheingold, 2008).
In light of this comprehensive social and technological change, urban planners
and political administrators have to be able, through smart decision-making, to
inform and involve people (residents, tourists and city users in general) in the
Chiara Garau, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Architecture (DICAAR), University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. Email: cgarau@unica.it
q 2014 Taylor & Francis

From Territory to Smartphone

planning processes while also raising people’s awareness of the cultural heritage.
This might be addressed through tools that allow a ‘three-dimensional’
understanding of the planning or heritage contents and that aid in making
information available to different non-expert users. Classic two-dimensional
communication does not allow users to have the same perception of actual planned
changes because of people’s varying basic knowledge and backgrounds. Where
3D models may represent a solution to this problem for some, others voice
objections related to the complexity of 3D models or the burden of creating them
(Azuma, 1999). However, both 2D and 3D models, users are always outside of the
representation, which causes users to remain spectators rather than participants.
Augmented reality (AR), by generating a composite overlap of interactive virtual
elements of reality, provides good support for human sensory perception
augmentation and a better understanding of the phenomenon that is taking place
(Dunleavy & Dede, 2014). Today, the rapid development in the ubiquitous
computing (UC) paradigm, especially in the mobile environments of the latest
generation, now allows anyone with a computer (or simply a smartphone) to be
connected in real time and to get information from the virtual world that
implements (‘augments’) reality through the overlapping of layers of information.
Additionally, city users can experience the urban space in new ways by correlating
it with digital information in forms that were impossible or unimaginable in the
recent past.
According to the literature, smartphones or AR enabled PC tablets that are
applied to cultural heritage can help cultural and urban development in two main
ways: (i) by overlaying a map with drawings, graphics, physical models, audio
files and digital simulations that help non-expert users understand culturally
complex phenomena and (ii) by integrating virtual elements with what appears on
site through visualizations of past historically accurate landscape architecture that
helps to increase the awareness of a place on the basis of its historical (as opposed
to merely visible) peculiarity. This is a new culture of fulfilling the potential of a
place and promoting its tourism industry: it opens up a territory where all buildings
can potentially create networks, which positively affects the production of
competitive common goods and common services. Put simply, it helps to create a
new form of cultural tourism that falls within the broader field of cultural
computing (Tosa et al., 2005).
The cultural message is thus reinvented by using an integrated camera to
provide real-time information about a site or monument, or about the route that
generic users are taking or even about the buildings in front of them. Thus, it is
possible to give the user the opportunity to visit lesser known, but equally
important, memorials, sites or museums. New ways to use public spaces are
introduced that increase the attractiveness of sites like museums.
It is precisely the latter, an example of a mix between reality and virtual
reality, where a service is offered to users that provides information that is much
more comprehensive and easier to interpret than that provided by any other
instrument or device. This is because it allows users to interact with the actual
environment while displaying virtual information on the same time (Piersantelli,
2010).
239

Chiara Garau

The interest in the cultural sector demonstrated by some groups of people
(sector operators, intellectuals, students, visitors, tourists, etc.) can definitely be
incisive and define the intentions behind their wanting these ‘special’ services. In
fact, although the sector of cultural tourism in Italy has strong potentiality, their
enthusiasm can contrast the negative trends that in recent decades have
characterized the Italian tourist economy. The Strategic Plan for Tourism
Development in Italy (2013) indicates among the causes of the Italian sector
decline: (i) the insufficient use of digital sales channels; (ii) the lack of service
applications for smartphones and tablets and (iii) a more general lack of a digital
strategy for tourism sector. In order to overcome these gaps, the same Strategic
Plan identifies targeted and specific actions, such as the development of
applications for mobile devices specifically targeted at foreign tourists, who can
integrate information related to logistics with those properly cultural (museums,
exhibitions, etc.). Service integration and interoperability of applications seem to
be issues on which to focus to relaunch national tourism.
Considering these assumptions, the following paper briefly describes the fast
development of new techniques and tools for promoting cultural tourism. This
paper then focuses on a platform simulation that is accessible in a ‘cloud’
environment that can be used to develop ‘smart’ services that provide a useful
prototype for the fruition of cultural heritage while paying special attention to the
driving forces of the economy and local tourism.
2. Augmented Reality: A Theoretical Framework and Its Application
in the Tourism Field
The progress of technology is determined by the degree of user involvement,
which, for a passive spectator, becomes part of the same technology, effectively
interacting with and guiding practical development. This was very clear to Ivan
Sutherland, the father of the current field of virtual reality research.1 He, through
his experiments, developed the first virtual reality device in as early as 1968. The
device’s feature was that it was ‘see-through’, which allowed it to simulate a
scenario while also continuing to show the surrounding reality in the background
(Castiello, 1995, p. 139). It is precisely this property that distinguishes virtual from
augmented reality. Over the years, and (thanks to Thomas Caudell and David
Mizell—who officially coined the augmented reality expression) in 1992 in
particular, the natural evolution of the concept of virtual reality (immersion in a
virtual world that simulates reality) led to that of augmented reality (the overlap of
virtual elements with the real world), passing through mixed reality (superimposition of virtual elements onto reality, but without knowing in advance which
is dominant in respect to the virtual reality). Numerous experiments were also
carried out (Azuma, 1999; Regenbrecht & Specht, 2000; Gleue & Dähne, 2001;
Newman et al., 2001; Vlahakis et al., 2001; Rohs et al., 2007; Morrison et al.,
2009; Angelopoulou et al., 2012) in the field of crowdsourced/volunteered
production of geospatial data or geovisualization based on AR technologies
(Liarokapis et al., 2005, 2006; Ghadirian & Bishop, 2008; Firmino & Duarte,
2010; Nebiker et al., 2010; Furht, 2011; Bishop, 2011; Graham et al., 2012;
Graham, 2013; Graham & Zook, 2013). For instance, Ghadirian and Bishop
240

From Territory to Smartphone

(2008) proposed an approach for displaying an urban landscape defined by maps
made with geographic information system tools, and they have integrated the
urban changes with AR.
Liarokapis et al. (2005, 2006) proposed a set of services defined by, and
localized within, AR technologies that are useful for the ‘urban navigation’ of city
users. Nebiker et al. (2010) used existing 3D urban modelling to propose an
overlap with AR technologies through the so-called ‘cloud point’ that identifies
main points of interest (POIs). Graham and Zook (2013), finally outlined the
concept of augmented reality as a medium that, influenced by four typologies of
power relations, can represent a place through the constant enactment and
remaking of multiple subjective realities. These typologies refer to the capacity of
the social production of augmented realities and the transparent nature of code and
consist of the following: (1) the distribution of user-generated content; (2)
communication power—namely the power to create, interpret, recirculate and
repackage content; (3) code power—namely the opaque sorting of information and
(4) the timeless power of the technology and/or the flattening of time.
In other words, the process of creating maps and location-sensitive information
is important not only in terms of original cartographic practices, but also in terms
of the designer’s ability, which can allow users to remake or recontextualize
geospatial information. The developer’s construction of a temporal compression
has to synchronize the in-virtual temporality and an in-the-moment experience of
that reality (Graham & Zook, 2013, pp. 469– 471).
Today, augmented reality is preferred because it is considered more able to use
digital information and new technologies to promote and enrich reality ‘with
material and virtual experience[s]’ rather than completely replace reality with
virtual environments (Furht, 2011; Fiasconaro & Guiducci, 2012; Graham &
Zook, 2013). Augmented reality has been applied in various sectors, but I will
focus on how it has developed in the context of cultural tourism. The constant
evolution of technological solutions in the world of cultural sciences has prompted
cities to upgrade their cultural tourism promotion, which has always been
supported by important international organizations like ICOMOS, UNESCO and
the World Tourism Organization. This interest has led to a change in the mode of
communication, from classic traditional forms, such as tourist guides and paper
maps, to current communication technology products (Figure 1).
Thus, a new urban cultural tourism culture emerged that aimed to improve the
experience of the generic user. The territory as a whole has assumed the role of a
complex ‘museum’. That is, the association of the term museum with that of the
territory is mainly translated in time as the synergistic promotion of physical
‘objects’ (places and institutions of culture, such as museums, archaeological sites
and parks, archives, libraries and monumental complexes) with virtual
technologies.
The urban space, associated with informational spaces (Castells, 1989; Stock,
2011), becomes a place where digital technologies (and often lines of coded
algorithms) bring out the complex cultural apparatus of a city through the dense
and overlapping layers of representation (Kitchin & Dodge, 2011). The purpose of
the synergy between real and virtual is to consolidate and enhance place-based
economic development, culture and the quality and integration of local resources
241

Chiara Garau

FIGURE 1. From traditional tools to those of the latest generation.

while respecting their historical identities. Tourism products are developed to
include more cultural offerings through a balanced dosage of the enhancement of
places, competition, cooperation and coordination between various involved
institutional actors.
It should be underlined, however, that while it may be necessary to use smarter
technologies to address complex urban challenges and to allow for effective and
efficient governance (Kanter & Litow, 2009), integrating advanced technologies
with the cultural landscape is not enough to promote cultural heritage to tourists. It
is, in fact, necessary to add supportive policies, platforms of governance and
monitoring managed by a committee to implement the promotion and
development of technological applications. Only in this way can new technologies
lead to (1) shared experimentation, (2) a willingness to integrate augmented
material and immaterial information to give a sense of ‘completeness’ to places
with a historical-cultural identity and (3) a process of mutual learning between the
tourist and cultural or historical landmark.
3. Augmented Reality Applied to Mobile Cultural Heritage
Applying the latest technologies to the field of cultural heritage should be seen as
valuable not only for the individual, but also, by extension, for the cultural or
historical landmark. This is the first prerequisite for the development of a
grassroots model developed by generic users who decide to approach landmarks
from a cultural heritage perspective, becoming a ‘DIY tourist’ and creating
territorial induced effects and a measurable impact on the territory. This role is not
imposed on generic users; the aim is try to get generic users to approach cultural
heritage in the manner best suited to them.
Just over 10 years ago, the applications of augmented reality, which valourized
the territory by making it an interactive museum that is usable in the open were
242

From Territory to Smartphone

only possible through the use of a stationary computer or a helmet connected to
portal equipment (e.g. ARCHEOGUIDE, created in 2001 and then experienced
on-site at Olympia in 2004. It is still in use [Fiasconaro & Guiducci, 2012]).
Today, the same technology is given to the user through a mobile device in the
form of a smartphone, which serves as an ideal platform for the applications of AR
(Angelopoulou et al., 2012). The excellent applications that allowed this
information revolution, and the subsequent use of cellular devices rather than PCs,
are represented by the invention of the ‘app’. The system, based on functioning
audio guides, frees the user from the need of a personalized guide, allowing him
the opportunity not only to choose what to see and what information to hear but
also to focus entirely on enjoying the cultural landmark.
Technological progress has made it possible to move beyond pilot or research
projects: a series of toolkits that use AR technologies have been developed and
marketed and experimental applications abound, such as the SmartMuseum of
2009 (Ruotsalo et al., 2009), the Nokia City Lens of 2012, Tuscany þ of 2010
(Linaza et al., 2012), AR Media (Inglobe Technologies, 2011) or even the
different evolutions of Layar (2009) and Layar Creator (2012). Their more or less
evolved functioning contributes, once the smartphone camera is pointed, to
viewing layers of information on the screen that overlap with current reality. The
information content is created previously as POIs that other users have added. It is
possible, for instance, to observe an expanded view of the surrounding area or to
choose the type of information that is displayed: commercial, health, tourism,
culture, etc. The user can refine the displayed information through some display
options or remain on a particular POI. Another useful application is Streetmuseum
(2010), developed by Thumbspark and created by the London Museum. It allows a
historical perception of the city of London through the display of historical images
that are visible once the generic user points the smartphone to a generic street
where there is a POI identified by the museum (Jones et al., 2012). Street museum
also allows the user the opportunity to see the POIs in advance and thus pre-plan
tourist paths.
These new technologies, integrated with services like Google Art Project (http://
www.googleartproject.com), could lead to a new cultural ‘museum’ of the city: not
only is it possible to get to the places listed on the site (for free), but the service can
also be exploited, for example, by integrating the information suggested on the
Google Art Project site with other useful services for all city users. To this could be
added the potential of a wiki or crowdsourcing project (Howe, 2006, 2009;
Brabham, 2009; Goodchild, 2009) that appropriately uses the practices of tagging,
folksonomies (the term, from folk and taxonomy, refers to an online cataloguing
system with tags made by the community that connect physical spaces, such as
museums, places or objects) and even user-created content (Hellin-Hobbs, 2010).
In this way, ‘technical’ production is implemented by collecting information
using a method of mass collaboration through so-called Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) (Goodchild, 2007), where groups of people create, manage and
disseminate spatial data (Sui, 2008; Sui et al., 2013). Any consumer-user is thus
transformed into a potential producer-user. This also allows for the differentiation
of cultural offerings based on demand (for instance, through strategies for
identifying target audiences) and the community, in terms of groups of individuals
243

Chiara Garau

instead of basic numbers (Simon, 2010). While the private sector already uses the
Internet on mobile phones as a channel for sales and marketing, mobile
applications as part of city and tourism marketing are fairly rare. Of course, there
is almost no local community in Italy that does not have Internet access, but, in
view of the developments in mobile devices and their applications, there is a need
to overcome the static information of the Internet.
4. A Case Study: A Smart Walk in Castello (Cagliari, Italy)
Considering the cited cases, it is evident that new technological frontiers offer new
opportunities to the planner, public administration and city users that grant the
ability to employ innovative tools for the construction of a virtual urban scenario
integrated with the physical one by virtue of the contribution of AR. In this paper,
a pilot application is presented that is available for download on smartphones or
PC tablets. This pilot application not only adds value to tourism in Castello, one of
the four historical neighbourhoods of Cagliari, Italy (Figure 2), but also to planners
or local administrators by accurately defining valuable cultural goods. The city of
Cagliari is among the six finalists vying for the title of the European Capital of
Culture 2019 and has met the first selection criteria due to the city’s demonstrated
willingness to pursue institutional cooperation in the field of culture (http://www.
cagliari-sardegna2019.eu/en/).
The choice of the Castello district is based mainly on its high concentration of
identifiable, historical and cultural landmarks, but is also due its city layout urban
plan, which has remained practically unchanged since the Pisan medieval period.
Its artistic and cultural condition is the result not only of a long historical process
towards which tourists converge but also, if not especially, the awareness of the

FIGURE 2. Cagliari and its historical centre.

244

From Territory to Smartphone

high value of its assets and their need to be protected and transferred to future
generations.
The study of the app has tried to take into account what was documented in the
‘Smart Cities Manifesto’, which was drafted during the international event ‘Apps
for Smart Cities’ held in Amsterdam on 29 March 2012. The Manifesto indicates
seven key elements that must be applied to the smart cities app: (1) sensitivity,
made possible with special sensors; (2) a connection to sensitive information on
the web; (3) accessibility to all users; (4) UC, which allows access to the system
through a mobile device at any time and place; (5) a connection with social
networks; (6) the ability to share any object that is not exclusively made up of data
and (7) the visibility of the system not only through the mobile device but also in
the physical environment (Vianello, 2013).
The main objective is based on the development of a plurality of paths and IPs
(home paths translated from the Italian Inizio Percorsi) where for each one a tour
has been hypothesized that should answer the unknowns that often accompany the
‘new user’ of a site: (1) which artistic and cultural heritage site is more worth
visiting and (2) whether the time available is sufficient to visit any given artistic or
cultural landmark. Through a simple user query that involves the user’s own
characteristics (age, physical ability as it relates to the physical demand of visiting
the site, etc.), the software suggests lists that enable the unsure user to view a
variety of information set out according to thematic and geographical proximity
(from closest to farthest) that is connected to multiple POIs in ‘smart walks’. If,
however, the user is more certain and knows what he or she would like to visit but
does not know its surroundings, the application calculates the time of arrival at a
certain place, the time required to visit it and places it on a route that incorporates
more cultural heritage landmarks (Figure 3). This has become important because
the generic use of these places is increasingly manifesting itself as an
extemporaneous factor, which, owing to cruise ships and low-cost flights, is
also characterized by very short periods of stay.
Moreover, the experience gained by a user is shared with other users, thus
helping to implement the system for both insiders, who can make improvements
based on user complaints, and generic users. In fact, generic users who enrich the
portal in terms of quantity and quality of information (because it is subject to the
monitoring of all), may choose to follow one path rather than another based on the
feedback and comments left by their predecessors (Figure 6). The system is

FIGURE 3. Identification and display of chosen path.

245

Chiara Garau

therefore based on the concept that the current amount of information available
online for the tourist, or for the generic user with little free time available, is
dispersed, not readily available and is filtered through checkpoints that can be
summarized as follows: (a) base maps, (b) tourist facilities and tourist
accommodation information resources (restaurants, cafes, hotels, guest houses,
etc.), (c) home paths (IP) and (d) transport utilities (Figure 4).
Once the path is chosen, the device provides the user with an overview of the
route. After the user has arrived at a point on the path and framed it with his
device, the image is overlaid with the data from a multi-channel, multi-lingual
platform that provides information, guidance, support, assistance, infotainment
and an online shop (Figure 5). In this way, a model of consultation and use is put
into practice that employs digital tools and channels for broadcasting and
interactive storytelling. It is a model of information sharing and transmedial
narrative consumption. This app is the model, as described above, because it offers
users access to experiences that blend—often in new, pleasant, engaging and
cultural ways—elements of (1) expert knowledge, (2) their own and (3) non copresent others’ experiences and memories. All of them constitutes past, present
and future real, narrative and virtual possible worlds.
This model would also allow an evaluation of the intangible cultural heritage
currently linked to the landmark that is subject to the risk of extinction (music,
songs, sounds, rhymes, spoken dialect, oral histories), facilitating its dissemination
and bequeathal to future generations (Ahmad, 2006).

FIGURE 4. Overview of the paths.

246

From Territory to Smartphone

FIGURE 5. Synthesis of the entire smart walk.

Once moved away from the monument or cultural POI, the device
automatically shows the user’s position and, using global positioning system
and global system for mobile communications, allows the user to continue along
the path. After a visit, the device allows the user to rate each POI on the quality of
service offered along a scale of values ranging from an extremely negative
assessment, defined by the term ‘poor’, up to an extremely positive one, defined by
the term ‘excellent’, with intermediate values defined as ‘mediocre’, ‘sufficient’,
‘good’ and ‘very good’ (Figure 6).
Users can also insert tags, images or comments, as well as promote knowledge
of the landmark through ways that are unique to the conventional paradigm of
cultural heritage. This feedback is then modulated according to an inclusive and
participative approach (Figure 7). Although this approach does not present an
innovative model in the context of urban planning tools (Comerio, 1985; Balducci,
1991; Davidoff, 2001; Garau, 2011, 2013), it shows how interest has been renewed
by virtue of the potential effectiveness of new technologies.
The incremental process leading to the construction of knowledge, by the
constant acquisition of information from the community through VGI, is a
fundamental principle in the application under study. However, although it is a
field that presents innovative application possibilities, it is necessary not to
underestimate some problems that beset it, including, for example, the quality of
VGI that inevitably leads to the classification of users (Coleman et al., 2009). In
fact, it can happen that (i) data collected voluntarily lacks proper localization
(caused by the inexperience of general users), (ii) difficulties occur in drawing the
same information because it overlaps and blends to interact with other layers of
information or (iii) the reliability of volunteer users can easily become
247

Chiara Garau

FIGURE 6. Paths with star ratings.

questionable. This particularly happens when there is no filter on incoming
information, which then makes it impossible to trace the inaccurate information at
a later time. Certainly, considering the voluntary nature of the data, the issues are
problematic and difficult to resolve. That said, allowing these issues to remain
unresolved will lead to a sub-par quality of information, even if intervention is
conducted ex ante through preventive measures or ex post by instituting corrective
measures.
The path described above promotes tourism on a small scale, which is only
foreseeable for those cultural and geographical areas that already enjoy a strong
power of attraction at national and international levels and have various types of
visitors (from short-term visitors, typified by cruise ship times, to the long-term
visits of experts with more in-depth interests). In Sardinia, for example, this
application may be considered for the ancient Nuraghe of Barumini (the most
important archaeological site in Sardinia, which has been declared a World
Heritage site by UNESCO), which attracts a large influx of visitors each year—the
demand exists, is consistent and consolidated. The historic district of Castello,
even with its highly valued cultural resources, aims to earn a prestigious position
248

From Territory to Smartphone

FIGURE 7. Paths with star ratings and with the possibility of adding comments, tags and ratings.

similar to that of Sardinia by beginning at a local level through the integration of a
number of cultural systems. The demand exists but individual places do not have a
great number of visitors; however, Castello’s integrated development could ensure
the economy of the area. The path described is, for the sake of simplicity, set in a
small area and is one of many possible paths that express the identity of the
historical and artistic heritage of the historic district.
For the Castello district, an advanced virtual realization of cultural heritage by
consumer-users might include the entire old city, which is integrated with the
system of parks and historical mansions, or it might venture into the urban
expansions of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to help visitors understand
the most significant architectural and urban planning characteristics and episodes
of the city, with a few episodes of the post-war and contemporary city that belong
to a wider selected area. This would mean a new way of reading the space of the
city and a new model of organization that leads to a widespread knowledge of
historical and artistic heritage.
Through appropriate agreements with the municipality, it is also possible to use
applications, which, owing to interactivity, will be able to faithfully reconstruct or
249

Chiara Garau

approve architectural or urban projects before they are carried out by introducing
augmented reality into these fields. This capability can also be used for generic
historical buildings, giving the user the possibility of moving around inside a site
that is currently undergoing transformation. For example, a user sees a building
(Figure 8a), identifies it and—using his or her smartphone—reads about the
transformations of that building (Figure 8b). Then, in the future, if the user wants
to return to the site he or she can see what he or she had only previously imagined
thanks to augmented reality (Figure 8c). In the same way, it will be possible to
compare the present and the future with the historical development of the
memorial places of that particular site.
In collaboration with galleries and museums, the visit could begin with a
generic panorama so spectacular that it arouses the admiration and awe of the
viewer, who might, for example, frame it with the smart device and immediately
acquire a list of artists who have been inspired by that same view, together with
related art galleries that exhibit paintings by these artists. The generic user could
go to admire one of the paintings on site or access the ‘online shop’ (with the
shopping cart icon) or the museum bookshop (where it is sold in the catalogue of
that painter) and ultimately decide whether to buy a copy—all directly from that
initial view on the user’s smart device (Figure 9). The marketing of merchandise is
certainly an added value that this app would provide, especially in museums that
are characterized by local production—the quality of which would be ‘guaranteed’
by the museum itself, thus enabling self-financing.

FIGURE 8. Future applications of AR in an architectural project.

250

From Territory to Smartphone

FIGURE 9. Future applications of AR. From a landscape scenario to its painting.

5. Conclusions
Currently, the extension of the city into digital space has changed the organization
and use of physical space. This modernization of the traditional city has led to the
passage from a reading of its physical infrastructures as separately related to each
other, to a new approach in which they are integrated and connected with people
and systems. Although technology is put to the service of the city, this work has
shown, with some evidence, that pervasive technological innovation alone cannot
guarantee a network logic that involves dialogue and reconciliation between
public and private sectors.
Network management, developed and constantly monitored by all city users,
can instead exploit all the cultural resources of an area. In this perspective, on the
one hand it would be desirable to create a network of cultural heritage that merges
together into a single information channel, thus allowing the composition of paths
(virtual or not) and promoting an integrated local tourism—or, at the very least,
the development of marketing and tourism (integrated advertising campaigns,
combination and single tickets, etc.). On the other hand, this paper has suggested
some reflections regarding the benefits of the use of such technologies. The
increase of knowledge that this research suggests is inherent in the networked
society’s structure because it provides the opportunity not only to disseminate
different fields of knowledge and culture, but also to place them in a critical
relationship with each other, share them and start a virtuous circle of growth and
economic development.
Moreover, from a didactic-educational point of view, the possibility to create
immersive environments can expand the attractiveness of various cultural
landmarks not only for the tourist-user, but also for resident and student-users. In
fact, it is possible to create conditions that encourage and enable users to approach
cultural heritage and its structures with less deferential, more dynamic, and
251

Chiara Garau

sometimes more in-depth attitudes, which may cause users to bond with the
territory and its cultural heritage in its broadest sense.
This, however, is difficult in Italy due to a culturally profound conservationist
perspective that presupposes a clear distinction between intrinsic cultural value
and economic value. In addition, it is a fairly rigid regulatory framework that
causes undeniable uncertainties in entrusting competences to public entities:
cultural heritage preservation is entrusted to the central level (State) while the
enhancement is delegated to State-Regions (LD 42/2004, known as Code of
Cultural Heritage and Landscape [art. 117, third paragraph]). The Code also
distinguishes between ‘institutions and places of culture’ (museums, libraries,
archives, archaeological sites and parks, monumental complexes) and ‘institutions
and public places belong to these institutions’ (art. 101– 102). Only for the latter,
the Code provides for an enhancement focused on agreements between local
authorities to define common strategies and to process consequential plans (art.
112, fourth paragraph), in the absence of which ‘each public entity is required to
ensure the enhancement of goods which still has availability’ (art. 112, sixth
paragraph).
For these reasons, I have used this paper to consider the importance of thinking,
not only in theoretical but also in practical terms, about how the cutting-edge topic
of AR technology can be integrated with notions of ‘cultural landmarks’, ‘the
protection of cultural heritage’, ‘the promotion of cultural heritage’ and ‘cultural
tourism’. This may be an opportunity for Cagliari to address these issues as they
apply to a larger territory than that used in this paper, while observing the
enthusiasm, motivation and dedication with which the public authorities of
Cagliari have undertaken to make the city the European Capital of Culture.
Note
1. Ivan Sutherland, father of computer graphics, in 1965, aimed to reveal the real world beyond the screen of the
machine. In 1968, he made a first rudimentary form of video helmet which shows a cube stylized backdrop of
the real world and senses movements in correspondence with the movement of the head. (Beccaria, 2005,
pp. 11–12; Soro, 2008, pp.290– 291).

References
Ahmad, Y. (2006) The scope and definitions of heritage: From tangible to intangible, International Journal of
Heritage Studies, 12(3), pp. 292–300.
Angelopoulou, A., Economou, D., Bouki, V., Psarrou, A., Jin, L., Pritchard, C., & Kolyda, F. (2012) Mobile
augmented reality for cultural heritage, Mobile Wireless Middleware, Operating Systems and Applications,
4th International ICST Conference, Mobilware 2011, London, UK, June 2011. Revised selected papers.
Lecture notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering, LNICST, Vol. 93, pp. 15–22 (Berlin: Springer).
Azuma, R. T. (1999) The challenge of making augmented reality work outdoors, in: O. Yuichi & T. Hideyuki
(Eds) Mixed Reality: Merging Real and Virtual Worlds, pp. 379– 390 (London: Springer-Verlag).
Balducci, A. (1991) Disegnare il futuro: il problema dell’efficacia nella pianificazione urbanistica [Shaping the
Future: The Problem of Effectiveness in Urban Planning] (Il Bologna: Mulino).
Beccaria, A. (2005) I pionieri della frontiera digitale. Internet: dagli esordi al World Wide Web [The Pioneers of
the Digital Frontier. Internet: From the Beginnings to the World Wide Web] (Viterbo: Stampa Alternativa).
Bishop, I. D. (2011) Landscape planning is not a game: Should it be? Landscape and Urban Planning, 100(4),
pp. 390–392.

252

From Territory to Smartphone
Blondiaux, L. (2008) Le nouvel esprit de la démocratie. Actualité de la démocratie participative [The New Spirit
of Democracy. Current Developments of Participatory Democracy] (Paris: Seuil).
Brabham, D. C. (2009) Crowdsourcing the public participation process for planning projects, Planning Theory,
8(3), pp. 242–262.
Castells, M. (1989) The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic Restructuring, and the Urban
Regional Process (Oxford: Blackwell).
Castiello, U. (1995) Tecniche sperimentali di ricerca in psicologia [Experimental Techniques of Research in
Psychology] (Padova: Piccin Nuova Libraria).
Caudell, T. P., & Mizell, D. W. (1992) Augmented reality: An application of heads-up display technology to
manual manufacturing processes, Proceedings of 1992 IEEE Hawaii International Conference on Systems
Sciences, pp. 659–669.
Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonte, J. (2009) Volunteered geographic information: The nature and
motivation of produsers, International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 4, pp. 332–358.
Comerio, M. (1985) Il community design oggi, Spazio e Società, 1985, n.31/32.
Davidoff, P. (2001) Advocacy and pluralism in planning, in: S. Campbell & S. S. Fainstein (Eds) Readings in
Urban Theory, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers).
Dunleavy, M., & Dede, C. (2014) Augmented reality teaching and learning, Handbook of Research on
Educational Communications and Technology, pp. 735–745 (New York: Springer).
Fiasconaro, V., & Guiducci, S. (2012) Realizzazione di un Prototipo di Realtà aumentata applicato ai siti
archeologici, in: L. Bordoni (ed.) AI & Cultural Heritage, pp. 39 –47 (Roma: ENEA).
Firmino, R., & Duarte, F. (2010) Manifestations and implications of an augmented urban life, International
Review ofInformation Ethics, 12, pp. 28–35.
Furht, B. (2011) Handbook of Augmented Reality (London: Springer).
Garau, C. (2011) Esperienze di pianificazione partecipata [Experiences in Participative Planning], in: Ricerche di
Architettura. Atti delle giornate di studio 8-9 aprile 2011 – Dipartimento di Architettura di Cagliari,
pp. 10–17 (Roma: Gangemi Editore).
Garau, C. (2013) Processi di piano e partecipazione [Planning Processes and Citizen Participation] (Roma:
Gangemi Editore).
Ghadirian, P., & Bishop, I. D. (2008) Integration of augmented reality and GIS: A new approach to realistic
landscape visualisation, Landscape and Urban Planning, 86, pp. 226–232.
Gleue, T., & Dähne, P. (2001) Design and implementation of a mobile device for outdoor augmented reality in the
ARCHEOGUIDE project, VAST 2001 – Virtual Reality, Archeology, and Cultural Heritage International
Symposium, Athens, pp. 161–168.
Goodchild, M. F. (2009) NeoGeography and the nature of geographic expertise, Journal of Location Based
Services, 3, pp. 82– 96.
Goodchild, M. F. (2007) Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of web 2.0,
International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2, pp. 24–32, Available at http://www.
geoinformatics.cn/wp-content/uploads/citizensasvoluntarysensors.pdf
Graham, M. (2013) Geography/Internet: Ethereal alternate dimensions of cyberspace or grounded augmented
realities? The Geographical Journal, 179(2), pp. 177–182.
Graham, M., & Zook, M. (2013) Augmented realities and uneven geographies: Exploring the geo-linguistic
contours of the web, Environment and Planning A, 45(1), pp. 77–99.
Graham, M., Zook, M., & Boulton, A. (2012) Augmented reality in the urban environment, Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers, New Series, 38(3), pp. 464 –479.
Hellin-Hobbs, Y. (2010) The constructivist museum and the web, pp. 72– 78 (London: EVA). Available at http://
ewic.bcs.org/content/ConWebDoc/36052
Howe, J. (2009) Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the Crowd Is Driving the Future of Business (New York:
Crown Publishing Group).
Howe, J. (2006) The rise of crowdsourcing, Wired, 14(6), pp. 1–4.
Inglobe Technologies. (2011) ARMedia Augmented Reality Plugin 2.2 now available. Available at http://www.
inglobetechnologies.com/en/news/fullnews.php?id=33 (accessed 10 June 2014).
Jenkins, H. (2007) What is Civic Media? in: Non Verbatim Transcript of a Talk given at MIT, September 20,
2007. Available at http://web.mit.edu/commforum/forums/civic_media.html (accessed 10 June 2014).
Jones, P., Eloy, S., Ricardo, R., & Dias, M. (2012) Architectural rehabilitation and conservation processes
informed by augmented reality, in: H. Achten, J. Pavlicek, J. Hulin & D. Matejdan (Eds) Digital Physicality

253

Chiara Garau
– Proceedings of the 30th eCAADe Conference, Vol. 2, 12–14 September 2012, Czech Technical University
in Prague, Faculty of Architecture (Czech Republic) pp. 411–418.
Kanter, R. M., & Litow, S. S. (2009) Informed and Interconnected: A Manifesto for Smarter Cities. Working
Paper 09-141. Available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/journals/hicss_2012_smartcities/hicss_
2012_smartcities.pdf
Kitchin, R., & Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Layar. (2009) LAYAR: The First Mobile Augmented Reality Browser Premiers in the Netherlands. Available at
https://www.layar.com/news/blog/2009/06/16/press-release-the-first-mobile-augmented-reality-browserpremiers-in-the-netherlands/ (accessed 10 June 2014).
Layar Creator. (2012) Layar Creator Places the Power of Interactive Print at Everyone’s Fingertips. Available at
http://www.layar.com/pr/creator/ (accessed 10 June 2014).
Lewanski, R. (2013) Institutionalizing deliberative democracy: The ‘Tuscany laboratory’, Journal of Public
Deliberation, 9(1). Article 10. Available at http://www.publicdeliberation.net/jpd/vol9/iss1/art10 (accessed
10 June 2014).
Liarokapis, F., Brujic-Okretic, V., & Papakonstantinou, S. (2006) Exploring urban environments using virtual
and augmented reality, Journal of Virtual Reality and Broadcasting, 3(5), pp. 1– 13.
Liarokapis, F., Greatbatch, I., Mountain, D., Gunesh, A., Brujic-Okretic, V., & Raper, J. (2005) Mobile
augmented reality techniques for geovisualisation, Proceeding of the 9th International Conference on
Information Visualisation, pp. 745 –751.
Linaza, M. T., Marimón, D., Carrasco, P., Álvarez, R., Montesa, J., Aguilar, S. R., & Diez, G. (2012) Evaluation
of mobile augmented reality applications for tourism destinations, in: Information and Communication
Technologies in Tourism 2012, Springer Vienna, pp. 260 –271.
Morrison A., Oulasvirta A., Peltonen P., Lemmelä S., Jacucci G., Reitmayr G., Näsänen J., & Juustila A. (2009)
Like bees around the hive: A comparative study of a mobile augmented reality map, in: Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2009), pp. 1889– 1898.
Nebiker, S., Bleisch, S., & Christen, M. (2010) Rich point clouds in virtual globes – A new paradigm in city
modeling? Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 34(6), pp. 508– 517.
Newman, J., Ingram, D., & Hopper, A. (2001) Augmented reality in a wide area sentient environment,
Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Augmented Reality (ISAR 2001),
pp. 77–86.
Piersantelli, G. (2010) Colpo d’occhio sulla Realtà Aumentata [Glance on augmented reality], Notiziario Tecnico
Telecom Italia, n. 2.
Regenbrecht, H., & Specht, R. (2000) A mobile passive augmented reality device, Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Augmented Reality (ISAR 2000), pp. 81–84.
Rheingold, H. (2008) Using partecipatory media and public voice to encourage civic engagement, in: L. Bennet
(ed.) Civic Life Online, pp. 97–118 (Cambridge, MA: McArthur Foundation).
Rohs, M., Schöning, J., Raubal, M., Essl, G., & Krüger, A. (2007) Map navigation with mobile devices: Virtual
versus physical movement with and without visual context, Proceedings of the 9th International Conference
on Multimodal interfaces, ICMI, pp. 146 –153.
Ruotsalo, T., Mäkelä, E., Kauppinen, T., Hyvönen, E., Haav, K., Rantala, V., Frosterus, M., Dokoohaki, N., &
Matskin, M. (2009) Smartmuseum: Personalized context-aware access to digital cultural heritage,
Proceedings of the International Conferences on Digital Libraries and the Semantic Web 2009 (ICSD2009),
Trento, Italy. Available at http://www.smartmuseum.eu/index.html
Simon, N. (2010) The Participatory Museum. Santa Cruz. Available at http://www.participatorymuseum.org/
read/
Soro, A. (ed.) (2008) Human Computer Interaction. Fondamenti e Prospettive (Milano: Polimetrica).
Stock, W. G. (2011) Informational cities: Analysis and construction of cities in the knowledge society, Journal of
the American Society of Information Science and Technology, 62(5), pp. 963–986.
Sui, D. S. (2008) The wikification of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and the future of
GIS, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32(1), pp. 1–5.
Sui, D. S., Elwood, S., & Goodchild, M. F. (2013) Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered
Geographic Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice (Dordrecht: Springer).
Tosa, N., Matsuoka, S., Ellis, B., Ueda, H., & Nakatsu, R. (2005) Cultural computing with context-aware
application: Zenetic computer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3711, pp. 13–23.
Vianello, M. (2013) Smart Cities. Gestire la complessità urbana nell’era di Internet [Smart Cities. Managing
Urban Complexity in the Internet Era] (Rimini: Maggioli Editore).

254

From Territory to Smartphone
Vlahakis, V., Karigiannis, J., Tsotros, M., Gounaris, M., Almeida, L., Stricker, D., Gleue, T., Christou, I.,
Carlucci, R., & Ioannidis, N. (2001) ARCHEOGUIDE: First results of an augmented reality, mobile
computing system in cultural heritage sites, Proceedings of Virtual Reality, Archaeology, and Cultural
Heritage International Symposium (VAST01), pp. 131 –140.

255

