The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

IMPACT OF VIRTUAL REALITY EXPERIENCE ON ACCESSIBILITY OF CULTURAL
HERITAGE
A. Paladini 1,*, A. Dhanda2, M. Reina Ortiz2, A. Weigert2, E. Nofal 3,4, A. Min5, M. Gyi6, S. Su6, K. Van Balen1, M. Santana
Quintero 2
1

Raymond Lemaire International Centre for Conservation (RLICC), KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 1, 3001
Leuven, Belgium - alice.paladini@studentkuleuven.be, koenraad.vanbalen@kuleuven.be
2 Carleton Immersive Media Studio (CIMS), Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada - (adhanda, aweigert)@cims.carleton.ca,
(miquel.reinaortiz, mario.santana)@carleton.ca
3 Research[x]Design, Department of Architecture, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 1, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
4 Department of Architecture, Assiut University, 71516 Assiut, Egypt - eslam.nofal@kuleuven.be
5 Department of Archaeology and National Museum, Bagan, Myanmar
6
Mandalay Technological University, Mandalay, Myanmar

KEY WORDS: Accessibility, Virtual Reality, wall paintings, Conservation, Cultural Heritage, Bagan, Myanmar

ABSTRACT:
Accessibility plays a main role among the aspects that contribute to the conservation of Cultural Heritage sites. Seismic stability,
fragility of the artefacts, conflicts, deterioration, natural disasters, climate change and visitors’ impact are only some of the possible
causes that might lead to the inaccessibility of a heritage site for both researchers and visitors.
The increasing potential of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in the conservation field has resulted in the
development of Augmented and Virtual reality (AR and VR) experiences. These ones can be very effective for what concerns the
description of the visual experience, but also improve the understanding of a site and even became analytic research tools.
This paper presents an inaccessible Buddhist temple in the Myanmar city of Bagan as a case study for the realization of a VR
experience that aims at providing accessibility to knowledge and therefore a better understanding of the cultural value. In order to
evaluate the effectiveness of the VR for this purpose, a user study has been conducted and its results are reported.

1. ACCESSIBILITY: BEYOND THE PHYSICAL
MANNER
Accessibility is not a secondary aspect of conservation, but a
fundamental condition for Cultural Heritage. Something
becomes heritage when people decide that it conveys certain
values. Therefore, accessibility is essential for something to
become heritage (Nordic Council of Ministers, 2009).
Guarantee the public accessibility to cultural heritage sites
should therefore be a prerequisite to any conservative
intervention.
The concept of accessibility, is strongly bound with the social
dimension of architecture and the search for solutions that
would improve and simplify everyday life despite social,
political and economic conditions; that is the reason why it
needs to be addressed as a tool that can lead to the cohesion of a
community instead of a mere regulatory exercise (Scarpati,
2016). The cultural debate around the role of architecture in
raising public awareness about the need for inclusion has been
given new life thanks to the development of new technologies
that can overcome physical and sensory barriers (Conti et al.,
2014).
When talking about accessibility, it is common to refer to the
principle of inclusivity and therefore to people with mobility
impairments. Physical accessibility of a building or a site often
requires additions and modifications in order to guarantee safety
for the visitors and avoid discrimination for those ones who
have mobility limitations. Architectural barriers can be usually
overcome by making interventions that might be either

temporary or become real architectural exercises in which the
combination of old and new give birth to a contemporary
interpretation of the cultural heritage (Arenghi, 2016). On the
other hand, these sorts of interventions, if not corroborated by a
proper understanding of the site, can lead to a loss of heritage
value. The 9th chapter of the Venice Charter states that “any
extra work which is indispensable must be distinct from the
architectural composition and must bear a contemporary
stamp”. This statement begs the question of what does actually
represent our time and consequently which kind of intervention
would best represent the contemporary research contribution to
the conservation field.
In its broadest meaning, accessibility does not only refer to
physical and perceptual barriers, but also to the practice of
conveying knowledge and understanding about a specific site
through the experience (Treccani et al., 2016). It is in these
terms that the concept of “Inclusive Design” should be
addressed: accessibility as equalization of the experience for
everybody on the enjoyment and on the understanding level
(Puyuelo et al., 2013).
However, conservation practices can sometimes be
incompatible with the right to access a site and enjoy its beauty.
It is not appropriate to guarantee the access to a cultural site
whenever its preservation might be in danger due to the fragility
of the site. This sort of reflections lead to the difficult part of
defining to what extent accessibility should be allowed before it
becomes damaging.
Two of the most famous cases are represented by the Lascaux
and Chauvet caves in southwest France. For both these caves, a

* Corresponding author

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

929

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

facsimile was realized in order to allow tourists to get
knowledge about these cultural heritage sites while protecting
the fragile condition of the real caves. When it is not possible to
guarantee the safety of visitors and researchers as well as the
preservation of the site, physical accessibility should not be an
option, but this does not mean that these heritage sites are
prevented from being experienced and, therefore, understood.
The traditional relocation and replication methods have been
demonstrated to usually lack in showing the original look of the
sites and in recreating their actual material quality, but the last
decades have seen the development of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT), which can provide useful
support for the understanding of cultural heritage (Zhou et al,
2012). One of the main task of contemporary research is
therefore to investigate the best application and qualities that
technologies such as Augmented and Virtual Reality should
meet in order to have an effective role in the conservation of
cultural heritage. However, it is important to always remember
that all new technologies and software’s must be at the
dependence of conservation scope.
2. CASE STUDY: MYIN-PYA-GU TEMPLE IN BAGAN
With more than 3.000 monuments in its archaeological zone,
Bagan is one of the six most visited places in Myanmar. This
incredible built heritage includes stupas (described as solid
inaccessible reliquaries), temples (with accessible interior
spaces) monasteries, and also ordination halls, fortifications and
technical architectures. The great majority of these structures
has been built between the 11th and the 13th century, during the
so-called “Bagan period” (Stadtner, 2013). Back then, Bagan
was indeed the first capital of the Burmese empire and therefore
the most important religious centre. The merit-making Buddhist
tradition, which requires people to intentionally do good actions
in order experience better circumstances in their future rebirths,
is the base of Bagan incredible archiectural landscape. Building
stupas and temples was in fact considered to be a source of
great merit and many donors were therefore attracted to donate
funds for their construction.
The territory of Myanmar in characterized by conditions that
can endanger the conservation and accessibility to its heritage.
Due to its geographic location, this country is intensively prone
to strong earthquakes and flooding.
The Myin-pya-gu temple (Figure 1) is currently inaccessible
due to a high degree of uncertainty about structural behaviour
and soundness of the laod bearing structures, as well as, and the
the state of conservation of its mural paintings. Given these
conditions, Myin-pya-gu is presented as a perfect case study for
the realization of a VR experience and to verify that VR is
effective at communicating cultural value.

Located South of Bagan City Wall, Myin-pya-gu is one of the
45 structures attributed to the 11th century in the Inventory of
Monuments at Pagan (Pichard, 2002).It was built between the
end of Anawrahta’s reign (1044-1077) and the beginning of
Sawlu’s one (1077-1084): tablets with the signatures of both the
kings have been found inside the temple (Luce, 1969).
According to Pichard’s size classification based on the external
dimension of the ground plan, Myin-pya-gu, with its 34,26 x
37,9 meters, is considered a large temple. Its maximum height
measures 23.43 meters but only one floor was supposed to be
accessed by the devotees.
Interestingly, from outside, this temple could be confused with a
stupa. Most temples end with a square tower instead, but Myinpya-gu has a bell-shaped dome and the ringed conical spire. The
temple is a combination of the stupa type with temple/image
house one (Koller, 2017). The element that does actually
identify this building as a temple is the fact that its base is
accessible and hallowed to create corridors and shrines with
Buddha’s statues.
The temple can be divided in two parts: the main body – which
contains the accessible parts of the temple— and the upper part.
The main body is topped with a square terrace with sloping
roof. The upper part is made of two square terraces with three
projections and sloping roofs, an octagonal terrace with three
projections and a circular bell-shaped dome with a ringed
conical spire on top (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Architectural analysis
The terraces were probably enriched by corner stupas, but, due
to the absence of external stairs, they were not designed to be
accessed by devotees.
Myin-pya-gu belongs to the category of the full core temples: its
centre is in fact made of full bricks, probably to provide better
stability for supporting the weight of the central stupa (Pichard,
2002).
The temple is characterized by a square plan with projecting
elements in the centre of each side. The one on the West side
hosts the only entrance to the temple and it is made of a porch
and a vestibule, while the other three projecting volumes
accommodate chapels with devotional sculptures of Buddha
against the outer walls (Figure 3).
A vaulted corridor that stretches around the solid core connects
the three chapels to the entrance and its presence can be guessed
from the outside due to the perforated windows that are located
at the end of each side of it.
The inner walls of the corridors are enriched with highly carved
trefoil niches accommodating brick sculptures representing
Buddha in various positions, while on the outer walls there are
richly painted mural decorations. From the centre of each inner
wall of the corridor, a narrow tunnel stretches into the core of
the temple to a small shrine where the principal and most sacred
images are located. Small plain perforated windows at the

Figure 1. Myin-pya-gu. West façade

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

930

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

corners of the corridors are the only openings through which the
light can get into the temple, so that the interiors are extremely
dark and the atmosphere is densely devotional.

Figure 4. The photogrammetric lighting setup
point cloud and photogrammetry data of Myin-pya-gu was
combined using Reality Capture. This photogrammetry software
was used over others – Agisoft Photoscan, Bentley Context
Capture, etc. – because of its processing speed, and because the
output mesh size is not limited by the user’s RAM (Remondino
et al., 2017).
The high-poly mesh created with from photogrammetry was too
heavy to be used in a game engine; it needed to be decimated.
The 3D modelling program Zbrush was used to decimate the
high-poly mesh to a more manageable low-poly mesh. Next,
mesh maps were created to simulate the original details on the
resulting low-poly model. In particular, albedo colour maps (or
texture), normal, ambient occlusion, roughness and metallic
maps were used for this example. Normal maps use RGB values
to encode surface normal directions and, when they are baked
from a high poly to a low poly, they create an impression of
depth that can be applied on a low-poly mesh to fake the details
of the high poly one (Figure 5).
Figure 3. Architectural analysis
3. METODOLOGY
3.1 Survey
Within the framework of a workshop about “Conserving Built
Heritage for Posterity: Bagan Workshop 2018”, Carleton
University, Mandalay Technological University, and
Myanmar’s Department of Archaeology (DoA) have been
involved in a survey campaign the aimed at recording 4 temples
in the archaeological area of Bagan to assess their state of
conservation using appropriate technologies.
The exteriors of Myin-pya-gu were recorded using both
photogrammetry and laser scanning. Due to the poor lightening
conditions, the interior of the temple was documented using
photogrammetry with diffused flashes, and intensity based laser
scanning (Figure 4).
3.2 Development of the Virtual Reality experience
Understanding the theoretical framework of VR and pros and
cons of its use is fundamental for a correct interaction the
technology. One of the complaints that is usually made against
VR is that, although it is considered to be highly enjoyable, it
lacks in rendering the same level of details of high resolution
photography (John et al, 2017).
The goal of the process was to find a way to keep a high quality
geometry in a real-time environment. In order to do this, the

Figure 5. Low-poly compared with the final result
On the other hand, Ambient Occlusion maps approximate the
inner shadows of objects when they are under diffuse lighting,
while Roughness and Metallic maps are responsible for
showing the irregularities and the metallic parts of a surface
(McDermott, 2018). Thanks to this technology, it was possible
to create a computer game and a VR experience very high in
quality and resembling the features of the original surfaces of
the temple, but light enough to be run.
The low-polys were then imported in Unreal Engine by Epic
Games, a free to use game engine which is easy to use for noncoders thanks to the Blueprints Visual Scripting system.
Both a computer game and a VR experience were created using
this software (Figure 6). The first one does not require a headset and, consequently, does not provide an immersive
experience. Another difference between the two products stands
in the way of moving around the virtual environment. In the
game, the arrows of the keyboard can be used to walk around

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

931

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

the temple, while in the VR the user can teleport to one position
to the other by using the space bar.
An introduction video, showing the point cloud reconstruction
of the outside of the temple, was added at the beginning of both
the game and the VR.

Figure 7. Participant trying the game and the VR experience
Figure 6. Screenshots from the Virtual experience: walls and
ceiling
3.3 Evaluation user study
In order to evaluate how both the VR and the serious game
enhance the communication of architectural heritage to the
public, and potentially raising their awareness on the cultural
value of Myin-pya-gu, a preliminary User Study has been
conducted. Participants were recruited to take part in the study
individually in order to dedicate them all the required assistance
and attention. They were at first asked to sign an informed
consent form and they were then given basic information about
the study itself, its aims and organization. They were also
informed of the low risk of feeling disoriented using VR
headset and of the possibility of stopping the test at any time.
Some general questions regarding their age, gender, profession,
familiarity with video games and Virtual Reality experiences
were asked before starting.
The study lasted 25 minutes on average and participants were
asked to analyse some standard information materials (pictures,
drawings and maps) before they could try the serious game and
the VR experience (Figure 7). The study deployed a mixedmethod evaluation, consisting:
- Questionnaire with both multiple choice and open
questions to evaluate the grade of understanding
- Observation of participants’ reactions to the different
proposed materials (how much time they spent examining
the standard materials and then using the game and the
VR);
- Sketching a simplified cross-section of the corridor to
evaluate the participants’ perception of the interior
dimensions of the temple by providing them with a grid
paper (including a silhouette of an average tall person to
maintain the scale).
- User Experience Questionnaire (ueq-online.org) to assess
participants’ overall VR experience.

4. RESULTS
The user study involved a total number of 13 participants; seven
females and six males, between 24 and 30 years, participated in
the test. The vast majority (N=11) was working or studying in
the conservation field and seven (N=7) people had already tried
a VR experience in a previous occasion.
4.1 Standard information materials: pictures and drawings
First of all, some pictures and drawings representing the setting,
the exteriors and the interiors of Myin-pya-gu temple were
shown to the participants. The intent of this procedure was to
evaluate how much attention people pay on standard materials
normally used to give information about inaccessible sites.
During this phase, participants were timed and no limit was
imposed. The average time spent on analysing the standard
information materials was of 1 minute and 28 seconds, with a
minimum of 40 seconds and a maximum of 3 minutes and 12
seconds.
Then, the participants answered some questions about the state
of conservation of the building, its materials and decorative
elements. When asked about which materials they could
recognize from the pictures, five (N=5) participants identified
bricks, only one (N=1) wood and three (N=3) recognized
plaster with paintings. Furthermore, nine (N=9) people thought
that stone was one of the used materials, but sculptures were
actually made of plastered and painted bricks.
Talking about the sculptures representing the Buddhas, five
(N=5) participants wrongly assessed that they were in low relief
and eight (N=8) people could not recognize any difference
between the statues. On the other hand, five (N=5) participants
noticed that some sculptures were more damaged than others.
Moreover, nine (N=9) of the participants could not describe any
of the elements represented on the mural paintings, while three
(N=3) of them recognized geometrical and floral motifs and
only one (N=1) noticed the presence of human figures.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

932

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

Figure 8. Chronological analysis of participants’ interaction
4.2 Serious game and Virtual Reality experience
Participants were then invited to try the serious game and the
Virtual Reality experience. As for the analysis of the standard
information materials, they were timed and no restrictions were
provided. The average time spent using the video game was of
3:34 minutes, with a minimum of 52 seconds and a maximum of
13:10 minutes, while for the VR the registered average time was
of 4:08 minutes, with a minimum of 1:30 and a maximum of
9:10 minutes (Figure 8). For the Virtual Reality, an HTC Vive
Head Mounted Display (HMD) was used for an immersive firstperson experience. Participants were thus asked to fill in a
questionnaire that was identical to the one they received after
looking at the standard information materials. It is important to
underline that they were not aware of the fact that they would
have had to answer again to those questions. By comparing the
results, it was possible to notice a general improvement in the
recognition of the materials. Four (N=4) more participants
recognized bricks (+ 80%), three (N=3) plaster (+100%) and
two (N=2) wood (+200), but more importantly two (N=2)
participants understood that sculptures were not actually made
of stone (-22%) (Figure 9).

Figure 10. Recognized features of the sculptures
For what concerns mural paintings, all the participants were this
time able to identify some of the represented items. The
majority (N=11) noticed the presence of human characters and
other ten (N=10) participants referred to have seen geometrical
and floral patterns. Moreover, five (N=5) participants
recognized blue, red and white temples (Figure 11).

Figure 9. Recognized materials
After using the video game and the VR, all the participants
noticed that the sculptures were in high relief (+62%) and
several differences between the various Buddhas were
identified. Nine (N=9) participants noticed the different state of
conservation of the sculptures, especially referring to the
absence of some of the heads (+80%), while for the first time
eight (N=8) participants realized that not all the Buddhas were
seated and other three (N=3) recognized differences in colour
(Figure 10).

Figure 11. Recognized motifs of the paintings
Both after consulting the standard information materials and
trying the game and the VR experience, the participants were
also asked to evaluate the state of conservation of Myin-pya-gu.
After the use of the videogame and of the VR, the value
dropped dramatically, meaning that these tools improved the
communication not just of the artistic and architectural features
of the temple but also of its fragile condition.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

933

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

4.3 Communicating the spatial dimensions and proportions
of the temple

Figure 12. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the VR
The participants were then asked to answer few further
questions only after they had tried the video game and the VR
experience. The results showed that these tools highly
contributed to raise interest in the temple and awareness on the
importance of conserving and restoring it (Figure 12).
When asked to suggest possible implementation to the game
and the VR experience, three (N=3) participants answered they
would have not modified anything, while other three (N=3)
suggested that it would have been interesting to explore also the
outside of the temple. Other suggestions included the possibility
of controlling the lightening (N=2) and go closer to the ceiling
to better analyse the mural paintings (N=2), but the most
popular request regarded the addition of audio (N=3) and
written (N=5) information when pointing at some specific
items.
This last suggestion would be certainly important when using
the game and the VR for communication and tourism purposes,
while the control of luminosity and the possibility to zoom on
some elements of interest would be precious tools for
monitoring and conservation goals.
In general, the graphic quality of both the game and the VR was
evaluated as very high and the participants almost unanimously
agreed that this aspect highly contributed to the enjoyment of
the virtual experience (Figure 13).
If on one side every participant preferred VR overall, there was
disagreement about the best way of exploring the virtual model.
Five (N=5) participants preferred the “walking” method used in
the video game because considered more natural, while the
other nine (N=9) assessed that the “teleportation” method used
for the VR was better because it allowed the user to concentrate
on what he was looking at instead of on the movement.

Figure 13. Evaluation of the preferred tool and way of moving

The ability of the serious game and the VR experience to
communicate the spatial dimensions of the temple was also took
in consideration for the user study. The participants were asked
to estimate the height, width and length of the corridor inside
Myin-pya-gu temple via sketching a cross-section, but since
these dimensions do actually variate quite a lot according to the
place they are measured in, all the answers included between
the maximum and minimum registered values of the three
dimensions were considered correct.
The right width of the corridor was guessed by five (N=5) of the
participants (38%), while other seven (N=7) were wrong by less
than 15% and only one (N=1) guessed a width that was more
than 30% larger than the real one. On the other hand, only two
(N=2) participants estimated the right height of the corridor,
while eight (N=8) participants proposed values less than 15%
higher or lower than the correct one, two (N=2) were wrong by
less than 30% and one (N=1) indicated a value that was lower
than the correct one by 37%. However, it is quite interesting to
notice that, considering the width/height ratio, the 77% (N=10)
of the participants were right. This result underlines the
tendency to perceive the correct proportions more than the exact
dimensions. The sketches of the cross-section of the corridor
show that all the participants recognized that the space was
vaulted and four (N=4) of them even drew the profile of the
niche hosting the sculptures of the Buddhas (Figure 14).

Figure 14. The section drawn by one of the participants
For what concerns the length of the corridor, seven (N=7)
people estimated the right value and two (N=2) of them were
wrong by 5%, while four (N=4) people estimated a length that
was between 30 and 50% shorter than the actual one (Figure
15). The fact that nobody estimated a longer length and that
46% of the participants perceived the hallways as shorter than
they actually are, conforms the results of previous studies that
users of Head Mounted Displays tend to underestimate
distances by 26% (Pietroni et al., 2018). This aspect should be
further investigated in order to provide solutions that will
enhance the communication of dimensions through the VR
mediums.
In general, the game and the Virtual Reality allowed the
participants to understand the volumetric dimension of Myinpya-gu’s inner space. The lack of correct answers for what
concerns the height of the corridor might be addressed to the
fact that the participants were not allowed to adjust the point of
view according to their own height. Both the game and the VR
experience were indeed calibrated on an average height of 1.70
meters. Future studies should therefore either provide the
possibility to change the height of the point of view or the
participants should be asked to write their own height.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

934

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

Figure 15. Dimensions estimated by the participants. Width, Height and W/H (top), Length (bottom)

4.4 User Experience Questionnaire
Finally participants were asked to fill in a standardized user
experience questionnaire (UEQ) adapted for the occasion. The
original UEQ is indeed made of six different scales
(Attractiveness,
Efficiency, Perspicuity, Dependability,
Stimulation and Novelty) for a total of 26 items, but only the 14
questions regarding the scales of Attractiveness (the general
impression of users), Perspicuity (whether the game and VR
were easy to understand) and Stimulation (valuating the interest
and excitement of participants) were taken into account for this
User Study. The reasons that lead to this choice are related with
the will of making the questionnaire easier for the participants
by avoiding parameters that could be unclear and that were not
considered interesting for the purposes of this study.
Participants were asked to express their opinion on both the
serious game and the VR experience on a scale that goes from 3 (representing the most negative answer) to +3 (representing
the most positive answer) and the results are shown in Figure
16.
The values between -0,8 and +0,8 represent more or less neutral
evaluation of the corresponding scale, values > 0,8 stand for a
positive appreciation and values < -0,8 refer to a negative rating
(Nofal et al, 2018). On the other hand, the error bars show the
confidence interval, which is the area where the true value of
the scale mean should be located with a 95% probability.
Therefore, big error bars stand for a not very precise
measurement and this can be caused by an inadequate sample
size.
From the data collected during this user study, it is evident that
both the game and the VR got very high results for all the three
scales applied. The VR generally got higher values and smaller
error bars, indicating that the results are quite reliable.

Figure 16. Results of the UEQ (the error bars represent the 95%
confidence intervals of the scale mean)

CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented Myin-pya-gu temple in Bagan as a
case study for the application of Virtual Reality technology to
provide accessibility whenever safety and fragility reasons
prevent both visitors and experts from physically accessing a
site.
The VR has been highly appreciated for its attractiveness,
perspicuity and stimulation, but, more importantly, it has
proved to be very effective in allowing users to recognize
materials, features and state of conservation of the temple. The
high resolution and the level of detail, that characterize the
virtual tools developed for Myin-pya-gu, have contributed not
just to the enjoyment of the users but also to the actual
understanding of the temple’s features and dimensions.
Furthermore, after having tried the game and the VR
experience, the large majority of the participants has

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

935

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

experienced a relevant increase both in their interest in the
temple and in the recognition of the importance of conserving
it.
These results demonstrate that these technologies can raise
awareness about cultural heritage among users and actively help
conservation experts in their research.
Future work involves the implementation of lightening and
contrast control for the optimization of the VR experience and a
better-detailed observation of the features of the building.
The inclusion of sounds and the development of interactive
ways to access information are also objects of future research
that looks at enhancing the qualities of VR as a working tool.

Nofal, E., Stevens, R., Coomans, Th., and Vande Moere, A.
"Communicating the Spatiotemporal Transformation of
Architectural Heritage via an In-situ Projection Mapping
Installation." Digital Applications in Archaeology and Cultural
Heritage
11
(2018):
E00083,
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.daach.2018.e00083.
Nordic Council of Ministers. Accessibility to Cultural Heritage:
Nordic Perspectives. Copenhagen K: Nordic Council of
Ministers, 2009.
Pichard, P. 1992–2002. Inventory of Monuments at Pagan,
KISCADALE EFEO UNESCO.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Myanmar’s Department of
Archaeology, National Museum and Library (DoA) for the
opportunity to collaborate in the documentation of this temple.
Special thanks also goes to Carleton Immersive Media Studio
(CIMS) and the students from Carleton University and
Mandalay Technological University who assisted in the 3D
capture during the workshop. This work was supported by the
NSERC Create Heritage Engineering program at Carleton
University.
REFERENCES
Arenghi, Alberto and Andrea Pane. "The Addition in
Conservation Project for the Accessibility to Cultural Heritage."
Techne: Journal of Technology for Architecture and
Environment no. 12 (2016): 57-64.
Conti,
Christina
and
Ilaria
Garofolo.
"AA_AccessibleArchaeology. Environmental Accessibility as a
Key to Enhance Cultural Heritage." Techne: Journal of
Technology for Architecture and Environment no. 7 (2014):
140-148.
Dhanda, A., Reina Ortiz, M., Weigert, A., Paladini, A., Min, A.,
Gyi, M., Su, S., Fai, S., and Santana Quintero, M.:
RECREATING CULTURAL HERITAGE ENVIRONMENTS
FOR VR USING PHOTOGRAMMETRY, Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., XLII-2/W9, 305310,
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W9-3052019, 2019.
John, D., L. Shaw, P. Cheetham, H. Manley, A. A. Stone, M.
Blakeburn and K. Gosling (2017). “Educational Virtual Reality
Visualisations of Heritage Sites”, EUROGRAPHICS Workshop
on Graphics and Cultural Heritage.
Koller, A., “Architectural Design at Bagan and Angkor: A
Comparison.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 27, no. 1
(2016; 2017): 1-49.

Pietroni, E., Pagano, A., & Fanini, B. (2018). UX Designer and
Software Developer at the Mirror: Assessing Sensory
Immersion and Emotional Involvement in Virtual Museums.
Studies
in
Digital
Heritage,
2(1),
13-41.
https://doi.org/10.14434/sdh.v2i1.24634
Puyuelo, Higón, Merino, and Contero. "Experiencing
Augmented Reality as an Accessibility Resource in the
UNESCO Heritage Site Called "La Lonja", Valencia." Procedia
Computer Science 25, no. C (2013): 171-78.
Remondino, F., Nocerino, E., Toschi, I., Menna, F., 2017. A
Critical Review of Automated Photogrammetric Processing of
Large Datasets. In: Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
Spatial Inf. Sci., Vol. XLII-2/W5, pp. 591-599,
doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W5-591-2017.
Scarpati, D. (2016), “Accessibility for a democratic Museum”,
in Greco, A., Giacometti, V. (Eds.), Improving the Accessibility
of the Cathedral in Milano: approaches and results of the
workshop I_AM_Duomo, Quaderni dell’Almo Collegio
Borromeo, Pavia, pp. 119-127.
Stadtner, D. M. (2013). Ancient Pagan. Buddhist Plain of
Merit. Bangkok: River Books.
Treccani, G.P., Arenghi, A. (2016), “Different Design
Approaches to Accessibility to Cultural Heritage: a Decalogue”,
in Arenghi, A., Garofolo, I., Sørmoen, O. (Eds), Accessibility as
a Key Enabling Knowledge for Enhancement of Cultural
Heritage, Franco Angeli, Milano, 2016, pp. 105-114.
Zhou, Mingquan, Guohua Geng, Zhongke Wu, and
SpringerLink (Online service). Digital Preservation Technology
for Cultural Heritage. 1. Aufl.;2012; ed. Vol. 9783642280993.
Beijing;New York;Berlin;: Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3642-28099-3.

Luce, Gordon Hannington, Bha Rhaṅ and Tin Co U. 1969. Old
Burma-Early Pagán. Locust Valley. New York: Artibus Asiae
and the Institute of Fine Arts, New York University.
McDermott, W., 2018. The PBR Guide Volume 2: Practical
Guidelines for Creating PBR Textures, Allegorithmic
https://www.allegorithmic.com/pbr-guide (27 October 2018).
Oculus, 2018. Oculus Quest, https://www.oculus.com/quest/
(27October 2018).

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-929-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

936

