C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Comptes Rendus Physique
www.sciencedirect.com

Terahertz electronic and optoelectronic components and systems

Innovative non-invasive analysis techniques for cultural heritage using
terahertz technology
Techniques innovantes d’analyse non invasive du patrimoine culturel basées sur les
technologies térahertz
Kaori Fukunaga ∗ , I. Hosako
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Tokyo, Japan

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Available online 8 July 2010

Terahertz (THz) spectroscopy and THz imaging techniques are expected to have great
potential for carrying out the non-invasive analysis of artworks. THz waves can penetrate opaque materials and they can perform three-dimensional material mapping nondestructively by spectroscopic imaging. Several attempts have been made to analyse artworks. Clear results, such as imaging of hidden art by using model paintings, have been
obtained by many institutions. We succeeded to observe the ﬁrst ever non-invasive crosssectional image of a tempera masterpiece by Giotto. These results prove that THz technology can yield useful information in art conservation science.
© 2010 Académie des sciences. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Terahertz
Cultural heritage
Nondestructive test
Mots-clés :
Térahertz
Patrimoine culturel
Essai non destructive

r é s u m é
La spectroscopie et l’imagerie dans le domaine térahertz présentent un grand potentiel
pour l’analyse non invasive des œuvres d’art. Les ondes électromagnétiques térahertz traversent les matériaux opaques et ainsi peuvent être employées pour réaliser une cartographie à trois dimensions des œuvres d’art, cartographie non destructive et fournissant des
informations spectrales. Plusieurs travaux d’analyse des œuvres d’art ont été publiés par
différents instituts, mettant par exemple en évidence des images cachées sous les peintures. Nous avons réussi à obtenir la première image non invasive d’un chef d’œuvre de
Giotto, résolue suivant l’épaisseur de la couche de peinture. Ces résultats démontrent les
performances de la technologie térahertz dédiée à l’étude des œuvres d’art.
© 2010 Académie des sciences. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Most ancient masterpieces of art have been subjected to restoration to recover their condition and beauty from deterioration due to inevitable natural effects, such as ultraviolet exposure, or damage by human activities. Restoration is like
performing a medical operation. The observation and analysis of materials and techniques are essential to plan the restoration, such as choosing the right materials to clean, repaint if needed, and varnish. The materials include those used in
previous ‘interventions’ in addition to the original materials. Restoration projects are often lead by historians, and useful

*

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kaori@nict.go.jp (K. Fukunaga).

1631-0705/$ – see front matter
doi:10.1016/j.crhy.2010.05.004

© 2010

Académie des sciences. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

520

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

background information can be obtained from literature, such as contract documents between clients and artists, purchase
orders for pigments and gold, and comments from critics. In order to provide further evidence and the current conditions
to help a conservator, various scientiﬁc analyses are used [1,2]. Photographic examinations, including using infrared, infrared
false colours, and ultraviolet (UV), are carried out as regular examinations. For museum collections and other great masterpieces, more precise analyses are often performed. X-ray transmission images provide useful information on the metals
used in an artwork, such as the nails connecting the wood panels of tempera paintings. Elemental analysis by X-ray ﬂuorescence is now widely used to identify inorganic pigments, and ﬁbre optics reﬂectance spectra (FORS) are used for the
non-destructive identiﬁcation of pigments [3].
When it is possible to obtain a sample from an artwork, organic materials such as varnish and binders can be analysed
by employing common techniques such as Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and electron probe micro analysis
(EPMA). However, the number of samples that can be extracted from an artwork is restricted, and it is not possible to carry
out such destructive tests in many cases. Cross-section images are informative for conservators since they directly present
the layer structure of the artwork; the support, preparation, and paint, reveals the technique in addition, if repainted layers
are found; the conservator must decide whether the additional layers should be removed or not.
For pigment analysis, there are many well-established techniques, such as infrared, Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray ﬂuorescence; and there is a large research group, the Infrared and Raman Users Group (http://www.irug.org), that organises the
spectral database of art materials. Terahertz (THz) spectroscopy also shows ﬁngerprint-like spectra which should provide
additional information to those obtained in the infrared bands. Unlike infrared spectroscopy that observes intramolecular
behaviour, the spectra in the THz region depend on intermolecular behaviour; in other words, the structure of molecules
determines the spectra. Because of this, crystal polymorphs are easily distinguished in the THz region, which are rather
diﬃcult to be distinguished in the mid-infrared region because the atoms that form each molecule are the same.
The biggest advantage is that THz waves can penetrate into opaque materials, reaching the preparation layers. THz pulses
used in time domain reﬂection imaging act as the probe and propagate through an artwork to obtain its internal structure
without requiring the sampling of the specimen. Such information cannot be obtained by other well-established methods
such as X-ray observation. In addition, the energy of THz waves is suﬃciently low to be considered as perfectly non-invasive
in practice.
It is highly expected that THz waves can produce a 3D material map. The THz technology is progressing rapidly, and
has been applied to various research ﬁelds [4,5]. We believe that THz spectroscopy and imaging techniques can become an
essential tool for the analysis of artworks in the near future.
This article introduces two aspects concerning the application of THz technology to cultural heritage science. One is THz
spectroscopy to analyse art materials as an extension of mid-infrared range spectroscopy, and the other is imaging, including
THz tomography, which can provide non-invasive cross-sectional and three-dimensional images of artworks.
2. THz spectroscopy for material analysis
The transmission and reﬂection spectra of gas, liquid, and solid specimens in the THz region can be obtained by conventional Fourier transform spectroscopy systems with the far-infrared option (FT-THz). Most commercially available systems
cover the frequency range from 0.5–15 THz. The ﬁngerprint-like absorption spectra of substances appear in the THz frequency region, such as those observed in the mid-infrared bands, and the spectral features are considered to depend on the
molecular and intermolecular behaviour of the substances.
There is a long history of the use of far-infrared (THz) analysis of semiconductors and inorganic materials in fundamental
physics research [6–8], although most of the optical properties such as phonon absorptions were observed using highly
pure substances at low temperatures. The spectra of several inorganic pigments in the THz region, including most of the
important pigments in historic paintings, such as cinnabar (HgS) and orpiment (As2 S3 ) [9], were observed in 1969 by using
the very ﬁrst FT-THz system.
Unlike in the mid-infrared, the spectral database in the THz frequency region is not commercially available. NICT and
RIKEN have developed an online spectral database (http://www.thzdb.org) in 2008, and will encourage participation around
the globe.
Although element analysis by X-ray ﬂuorescence can provide essential information about inorganic pigments, THz spectroscopy can easily distinguish pigments that have almost the same colour and include the same mineral elements, because
the spectra depend on the molecular behaviour.
Fig. 1(a) shows examples of the transmission spectra of copper-based pigments. It would be rather diﬃcult for X-ray
ﬂuorescence to distinguish these pigments without sampling. On the other hand, they can be easily distinguished in the
THz region, on the basis of spectral features. Fig. 1(b) shows the transmission spectra of several binders [10]. In general,
binders are chemically active when compared to inorganic pigments, and hence, it is important to identify binders in order
to examine the ageing of the artworks. Oil and natural resins are transparent and Venetian turpentine has the characteristics
of oil and resin. The spectra of Beva, which is the ﬁrst synthetic resin designed for art conservation, include the spectral
features of polyvinyl acetate (PVAc) and a natural resin. Further quantitative investigation is required to validate the possibility of using THz spectroscopy to distinguish between binders and paints, and the investigation has been started [11].
There are materials that do not have particular features in spectra in the THz region. For example, earth pigments such
as sinopia are usually very dull, and organic dyes are almost transparent in the THz region, as shown in Fig. 2. However,

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

521

Fig. 1. Examples of THz spectra in transmission mode of (a) inorganic pigments, (b) binders.

Fig. 2. THz transmission spectra of earth pigments and organic dyes.

additional numerical analysis, such as chemometrics, could be used for extracting particular features in broad spectra, since
it has been applied to spectra in the near-infrared region.
Reﬂection spectra are practically very useful for the analysis of actual artworks; most artworks cannot be removed from
the support and only limited types of artwork can be allowed to be measured in the transmission mode. Fig. 3 shows the
reﬂection spectra of lead white, calcite, cinnabar, and sinopia. Although the reﬂection spectra can be affected by the surface
conditions, these specimens were painted by ﬁne pigments (less than 20 μm in diameter), and the condition is similar to
the real artworks.
3. Material mapping based on spectroscopy
There have been various attempts to apply THz spectroscopy and imaging for the preservation of cultural heritage, which
includes artwork analysis and material mapping by using the model specimens of frescoes, oil on canvas paintings, and
parchments [12–16]. As an example of non-destructive material analysis, THz spectra from the surface of an oil painting
were compared with X-ray ﬂuorescence, and it was suggested that THz can distinguish materials [12]. THz false colour

522

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

Fig. 3. THz reﬂection spectra of lead white, calcite, cinnabar, and sinopia.

Fig. 4. Reﬂection images of two white and two red tiles obtained by Picometrix T-Ray 4000(R) [17].

Fig. 5. Water absorption monitoring by the THz real-time imaging system.

mapping based on the spectral database, including more than 200 spectra, was proposed by using a model painting specimen [13]. Jackson et al. applied THz imaging in mural painting and determined the difference in reﬂection depending on
pigments [14].
By using the THz-TDS imaging system (Picometrix T-Ray 4000) [17], we have observed the image of tiles painted with
two white and two red pigments of which the reﬂection spectra are shown in Fig. 3. The frequency range was around 0.5
to 1.5 THz, and the power integration of the reﬂection signal was described in grey scale; highest in white and lowest in
black. As shown in Fig. 4, the area painted with the reﬂective pigments in the frequency range of the system, such as lead
white and cinnabar, appeared in white and the other two were dark. It proves that THz imaging can indicate the difference
in the material in the area painted in the same colour.
Here, when a real-time observation is required, such as for the drying process during the conservation, the THz camera
developed by NEC and NICT would be extremely useful [18]. Since it operates at a single frequency emitted by a quantum
cascade laser, the results detected by a bolometer array sensor are a map of the level of transmission or reﬂection at the
given frequency. Fig. 5 shows the transmission imaging of a piece of paper with water at its bottom; and is displayed
in grey scale, where the highest transmission is in white and the lowest is in black. Since water absorbs THz waves, the
transmission of the paper decreases along with water absorption from the bottom. THz real-time imaging makes it possible
to observe such transient phenomena, at 60 frames per second, if required. Multi-frequency sources are desirable to perform
material mapping more precisely.

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

523

Fig. 6. Model of a typical painting and the use of various analysis methods, and layer structure observation by using THz pulse.

Fig. 7. Surface deterioration observation of an oil painting on another old oil painting on canvas and the non-destructive cross-section image by THz-TDS
imaging.

4. Imaging of internal structure
As described in the introduction, the biggest advantage of using THz for conservation science is that the time domain
imaging uses the THz pulse. It can provide non-destructive cross-section image that helps conservators to understand the
techniques and repainted layer in the previous conservation. In particular, mapping (area information) of the layer of interest
in a multi-layer structure cannot be obtained by other existing methods.
Fig. 6 presents a model of a painting and a comparison of observation methods. UV is useful for examining varnish,
whereas infrared can reveal the underdrawing. X-rays pass through most non-metal materials. THz can be used to analyse
the materials slightly below the layers of the paint, such as preparation layers. According to conservators, information in the
preparation layers is important in understanding artworks. THz waves are perfectly non-invasive and provide a cross-section
image, reaching to the preparation layer, without direct contact.
A.J.L. Adam et al. conﬁrmed that the drawing layer was recognised from the back side of a model oil painting on
canvas by avoiding the scattering of signals due to the surface irregular roughness [19]; carbon black drawings on layers of
papyrus were clearly observed [20]. Letters written using pencils (graphite-based composite) on layers in a block note were
successfully observed by some institutions with the help of THz tomography and THz tomosynthesis [21–24].
We have applied THz imaging to observe practical specimens. In the case of modern oil painting or traditional Japanese
artworks, the main problem is the formation of cracks on the surface. Fig. 7 shows an example of surface deterioration
observation of an oil painting on another old oil painting on canvas. Although the separation of a paint layer is not easily
visible from the surface, the non-destructive cross-section image, shown in Fig. 7(b), clearly indicates the air gap. When
we perform mapping of the layer of interest by time domain imaging, it is very important to extract the proper information from the reﬂection signals. Fig. 8 shows the difference of images formed by using different parts of the same output
signal. Fig. 8(a) is based on the ﬁrst peak that shows the material mapping of the surface, inﬂuenced by the surface roughness. Fig. 8(b) is drawn by the maximum value, i.e., the reﬂection from the internal interface, such as that between the
painting layer and air. Thus, it is essential to view signals in the time domain, when THz TDS reﬂection imaging is performed.
THz tomography makes it possible to see through an object such as a sculpture. Fig. 9 shows a paper made traditional toy
painted and lacquered, and its THz imaging result observed by the new THz 3D imaging system by Advantest Corporation,
which was developed in collaboration with Prof. Kawase of Nagoya University. THz tomography revealed that there is a
stone inside the toy which maintains the stability of the toy. This technique will be extremely useful to examine such art
objects since there are many sculptures that have hidden objects inside them, for example, a piece of holy object inside the
wooden Buddha.

524

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

Fig. 8. THz area imaging of the layer of interest, (a) surface, (b) interface between the new and old paintings.

Fig. 9. A paper-made toy and its THz imaging, (a) a photograph of a Beko, (b) THz 3D image of a Beko (Courtesy: Advantest Co.).

Fig. 10. Observation of crack in the panel of San Benedetto.

5. Case study (Polittico di Badia)
We had the opportunity to analyse a real masterpiece at the Galleria degli Uﬃzi. The Polittico di Badia, by Giotto di
Bondone, is a tempera painted on wood panels. It was an altarpiece of the Badia Fiorentina church, and is now in the
permanent collection of the Uﬃzi.
The Polittico di Badia underwent conservation from last year until February this year, and in December we spent three
days carrying out THz observations at the Uﬃzi Gallery. We measured the areas shown by using Picometrix T-Ray 4000.
THz images are shown in grey scale, and high values for either transmission or reﬂection are shown in white.
Fig. 10 shows an example of non-invasive cross-section images along the broken line in the panel of San Benedetto.
There was a visible crack, but its depth could not be measured from the surface. The THz cross-section image revealed that
the preparation layer at this crack had been completely lost and that only the surface layer of paint was added previously.
Fig. 11 shows an image of the area marked as a square, slightly beneath the surface of the panel of Madonna col
Bambino. Since the reﬂection from the gold is very strong, the shape of the gold foil is visible even when it is under the
paint. This is very useful for conservators because they can pay closer attention to that area when they are cleaning the
painting. The area information obtained by THz imaging is not limited near the surface. The pulse is reﬂected from each
layer, as shown in the cross-section image in Fig. 12. By extracting each pulse, information over an area of the layer of
interest can be obtained non-destructively. This information cannot be obtained from other existing methods. For example,
tool marks were clearly observed on the surface of the wood support (Fig. 12, bottom image), and we conﬁrmed that there
was a canvas between the two gesso layers, because the image obtained at the interface between the two layers has a

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

525

Fig. 11. Gold foil detection under painted area in the panel of Madonna col Bambino.

Fig. 12. THz imaging of the Polittico di Badia. From the top, image of canvas, cross-section, and wood support surface.

regular pattern (Fig. 12, top image) that indicates the material used is cloth. THz imaging added the scientiﬁc evidence that
Giotto followed the medieval manner. This technique used two gesso layers, and the motif resembled a human being. This
fact revealed that Polittico di Badia is a milestone work from the medieval to the Renaissance era. The results prove that
the THz analysis provides valuable information for both historians and conservators [25].
6. Conclusions
THz spectroscopy and imaging have attracted considerable interest in the ﬁeld of art conservation and research as an
innovative and non-invasive analysis technique. It is clear that transmission and reﬂection imaging can distinguish between pigments, and the images can provide information about the painting and materials originally used by the artist and
those used in subsequent restoration works. We carried out the ﬁrst ever THz imaging of the real tempera masterpiece
by Giotto and conﬁrmed that THz spectroscopy and the imaging technique can provide useful information to art historians and conservators for investigating the history of an artwork. We conclude that the non-invasive observation method of
THz spectroscopy imaging should be considered as a complementary technique to classical photographic analyses that use
frequency regions ranging from X-rays to the mid-infrared.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the staff of Uﬃzi Gallery and Dr. M. Picollo of IFAC-CNR for giving the opportunity to
work on Polittico di Badia by Giotto, and Prof. Y. Ogawa, Prof. K. Kawase, Dr. N. Oda, and Dr. Irl Duling for their discussions
on THz imaging, and the staff of Advantest Corp. for allowing to use a THz tomography image.

526

K. Fukunaga, I. Hosako / C. R. Physique 11 (2010) 519–526

References
[1] D. Pinna, et al., Scientiﬁc Examination for the Investigation of Paintings. A Handbook for Conservator-Restorers, Centro Di, Firenze, 2009.
[2] M.R. Derrick, et al., Infrared Spectroscopy in Conservation Science, The Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles, 1999.
[3] M. Picollo, S. Porcinai, Non destructive spectroscopic investigation on artworks, in: Recent Research Developments in Applied Spectroscopy, vol. 2,
1999, pp. 125–135.
[4] D.M. Mittleman, Sensing with Terahertz Radiation, Springer, Berlin, 2003.
[5] M. Tonouchi, Cutting edge terahertz technology, Nature Photonics 1 (2007) 97–105.
[6] E.D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Academic Press, New York, 1997.
[7] Otfried Madelug, Landolt–Bernstein Semiconductors: Data Handbook, Springer, 2003.
[8] Richard A. Nyquist, Ronald O. Kagel, Infrared Spectra of Inorganic Compounds (3800–45 cm−1 ), Academic Press, New York, 1971.
[9] C. Karr Jr., J.J. Kovach, Far-infrared spectroscopy of minerals and inorganics, Applied Spectroscopy 23 (1969) 219–223.
[10] I. Hosako, et al., At the dawn of a new era in terahertz technology, Proceedings of IEEE 95 (2007) 1611–1623.
[11] J.-M. Manceau, et al., Terahertz time domain spectroscopy for the analysis of cultural heritage related materials, Applied Physics B 90 (2008) 365–368.
[12] W. Köhler, et al., Non-destructive investigation of paintings with THz-radiation, in: Proceedings of European Conference of Non-Destructive Testing,
2006, No. P181.
[13] K. Fukunaga, et al., Terahertz spectroscopy for art conservation, IEICE Electronics Express 4 (2007) 258–263.
[14] J.B. Jackson, et al., Terahertz imaging for non-destructive evaluation of mural paintings, Optics Communications 281 (2008) 527–532.
[15] K. Fukunaga, et al., Application of terahertz spectroscopy for character recognition in a medieval manuscript, IEICE Electronics Express 5 (2008) 223–
228.
[16] G.P. Gallerano, et al., THz-ARTE: non-invasive terahertz diagnostics for art conservation, in: Proc. IRMMW-THz, 2008, No. T2G2.
[17] D. Zimdars, et al., Security and non destructive evaluation application of high speed time domain terahertz imaging, in: Proc. Lasers and Electro-Optics,
2006, No. CMLL1.
[18] N. Oda, et al., Detection of terahertz radiation from quantum cascade laser, using vanadium oxide microbolometer focal plane arrays, Proc. SPIE (2008)
6940.
[19] A.J.L. Adam, et al., Terahertz imaging of hidden paint layers on canvas, Optics Express 17 (2009) 3407–3416.
[20] J. Labaune, et al., Papyrus imaging with terahertz time domain spectroscopy, in: Proc. European Materials Research Society 2009 Meeting, 2009.
[21] S. Wang, X.-C. Zhang, Pulsed terahertz tomography, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 37 (4) (2004) R1–R36.
[22] J. Takayanagi, et al., High-resolution time-of-ﬂight terahertz tomography using a femtosecond ﬁber laser, Optics Express 17 (2009) 7533–7539.
[23] N. Sunaguchi, et al., Depth-resolving THz imaging with tomosynthesis, Optics Express 17 (2009) 9558–9570.
[24] E. Abraham, et al., Broadband terahertz imaging of documents written with lead pencils, Optics Communications 282 (2009) 3104–3107.
[25] K. Fukunaga, et al., Terahertz imaging systems: A non-invasive technique for the analysis of paintings, Proc. SPIE (2009), No. 7391D.

