N E W H E R I T A GE

The use of new media in the service of cultural heritage is a fast growing
ﬁeld, known variously as virtual or digital heritage. New Heritage, under
this denomination, broadens the deﬁnition of the ﬁeld to address the
complexity of cultural heritage such as the related social, political and
economic issues. This book is a collection of 20 key essays, of authors
from 11 countries, representing a wide range of professions including architecture, philosophy, history, cultural heritage management, new media,
museology and computer science, which examine the application of new
media to cultural heritage from a different point of view. Issues surrounding heritage interpretation to the public and the attempts to capture the
essence of both tangible (buildings, monuments) and intangible (customs,
rituals) cultural heritage are investigated in a series of case studies.
Current discourses arising subsequent to the marriage of new media and
cultural heritage are explored, such as the ongoing debate regarding the
status of the original and the copy. Challenges addressed in creating cultural heritage virtual environments, such as engagement and evaluation,
are presented, and lessons learned from case studies of digital applications
in both formal and informal learning environments as well as theoretical
and technical frameworks are discussed along with the related methodological limitations. This book is essential reading for those people wishing to
understand the key debates in ‘new heritage’ and appraise the growing
innovations applied to cultural heritage.
Yehuda E. Kalay is professor of architecture at the University of California,
Berkeley, and former director of UC Berkeley’s interdisciplinary Center for
New Media.
Thomas Kvan is currently Dean of the Faculty of Architecture at the
University of Melbourne.
Janice Afﬂeck’s background is in Architecture; her interests in digital media
and heritage conservation were focused in her PhD and research activities
in the area of New Heritage.

N EW HE RIT A G E
New media and cultural heritage

Edited by
Yehuda E. Kalay, Thomas Kvan &
Janice Afﬂeck

First published 2008
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2008 Yehuda Kalay, Thomas Kvan & Janice Afﬂeck for editorial
matter and selection; individual contributions, the contributors
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Kalay, Yehuda E.
New heritage : new media and cultural heritage / Yehuda E. Kalay,
Thomas Kvan & Janice Afﬂeck.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-415-77356-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) –
ISBN 978-0-415-77355-3 (hardback : alk. paper)
1. Cultural property–Digitization. 2. Digital media. 3. Virtual
reality. 4. Technological innovations. 5. Interpretation of cultural
and natural resources. 6. Cultural property–Digitization–Case
studies. 7. Digital media–Case studies. 8. Virtual reality–Case
studies. 9. Technological innovations–Case studies.
10. Interpretation of cultural and natural resources–Case studies.
I. Kvan, Thomas. II. Afﬂeck, Janice. III. Title.
CC135.K35 2008
363.6’9–dc22
2007022530
ISBN 0-203-93788-0 Master e-book ISBN

ISBN 10: 0-415-77355-5 (hbk)
ISBN 10: 0-415-77356-3 (pbk)
ISBN 10: 0-203-93788-0 (ebk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-77355-3 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-77356-0 (pbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-203-93788-4 (ebk)

C O N T EN T S

List of ﬁgures and tables
List of contributors
Preface

viii
xii
xv

Introduction: Preserving cultural heritage through digital media

1

Y E H U D A E . K A LA Y

PART 1

New heritage overview: Media, affordances and strategies
1 Cultural heritage in the age of new media

11
13

JEFF MALPAS

2 The vanishing virtual: Safeguarding heritage’s endangered
digital record

27

A L O N Z O C . A D DI S O N

3 Virtual heritage: Mediating space, time and perspectives

40

B H A R A T DA V E

4 Through form and content: New media components and
cultural heritage sites management, in the Jewish traditional
society

53

Y E H U D A G R E E N FI ELD- GI LA T

5 History is 3D: Presenting a framework for meaningful
historical representations in digital media
SA R A R O E GI E RS A N D FR EDER I K T R U Y EN

v

67

C O NT E NT S

P A RT 2

Essence: Digital representation and interpretation of
cultural heritage
6 Chasing the unicorn?: The quest for “essence” in digital
heritage

79

81

NEIL SILBER M A N

7 Memory capsules: Discursive interpretation of cultural
heritage through new media

92

J ANIC E AF F LE C K A N D T H O M A S K V A N

8 Cross-media interaction for the virtual museum:
Reconnecting to natural heritage in Boulder, Colorado

112

ELISA G IAC C A R D I

9 Experiencing the city through a historical digital system

132

J OSE R . K OS

P A RT 3

Discourse: The marriage of new media and cultural
heritage

153

10 Consuming heritage or the end of tradition: The new
challenges of globalization

155

NEZ AR ALSAYY A D

11 The politics of heritage authorship: The case of digital
heritage collections

170

F IONA C AMER O N

12 Explorative shadow realms of uncertain histories

185

ER IK M. C H AM P I O N

13 Making a livable “place”: Content design in virtual
environment
X IAOLEI C H EN A N D Y EH U D A E. K A LA Y

vi

207

CONTENTS

PART 4

New heritage in practice: Virtual environments

223

14 The components of engagement in virtual heritage
environments

225

M A R I A R O U SS O U

15 Educational tool or expensive toy? Evaluating VR
evaluation and its relevance for virtual heritage

242

M A R I A E C O N O MO U A N D LA I A PU JO L T O S T

16 Designing a virtual museum of architectural heritage

261

HANNAH LEWI

17 Place-Hampi: Co-evolutionary narrative and augmented
stereographic panoramas, Vijayanagara, India

275

SA R A H K E N DER DI N E, JEFFR EY S H A W, DEN N I S D E L FA V E R O A ND
NEIL BROWN

18 Digital Songlines: Digitising the arts, culture and heritage
landscape of aboriginal Australia

294

B R E T T L E A V Y , T H EO DO R G. WY ELD, JA MES HI L L S, C HR I S
B A R K E R A N D S T EPH A N GA R D

Conclusion: A future for the past

304

THOMAS KVAN

Index

314

vii

F IG URES AN D TA BLES

Figures
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.5

7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7

Scenes from Ur video sequence (Taisei 2006)
Scanning Banteay Kdei temple and elevation of 3D point
cloud
Reconstruction at Pagan, Myanmar
Sequence of views from GoogleEarth showing UNESCO
World Heritage sites
UNESCO’s World Heritage online portal, with a page
detailing the Galápagos site
Ancient civilization virtual trip (Taisei 2001)
History of architecture web (Wishna 2005)
Archeoguide augmented reality reconstruction (Vlahakis
et al. 2001)
Virtual characters in ancient Pompeii (Miralab 2005)
Western Wall and Dome of the Rock
Map of Jerusalem’s old city
(Above) and Figure 4.4 (Below). Parts of the
computerized model, Davidson center
(Above) and Figure 4.6 (Below). Simulation of the Jewish
temple on temple mount and the “menorah,” one of the
temple service vessels
English memory capsule home page
Cantonese memory capsule home page
Albums screen top frame, the Help function bottom frame
Memory capsule site top frame. Contribute instructions
bottom frame
Dim Sum
Example contribution
Tram going through central
viii

28
31
33
36
38
45
46
46
47
55
56
58

59
97
98
99
100
101
103
103

FIGURES AND TABLE S

7.8
7.9
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5

8.6

8.7
9.1
9.2
9.3
12.1
13.1
14.1

14.2

Tsing Yi
Selected contributions
An area of Boulder’s open space and mountain parks
(© OSMP)
Ways of experiencing natural heritage along the Boulder
Creek (© OSMP)
Images from the testing of the locative application
(© Politecnico di Torino)
Prototypes of the Web interface based on MapServer (left)
and Google APIs (right) (© L3D)
Prototype of the tangible social interface based on the
L3D’s envisionment and discovery collaboratory
technology (Arias et al. 2000) (© L3D)
Overview of cross-media interaction: (1) GPS satellite
tracking; (2) Participants in open space; (3) Locative
interface for sound collection; (4) Wireless connection
(when available); (5) Web server; (6) Web interface for
collaborative mapping on the web; (7) Tangible social
interface for collaborative mapping in the public space
(© Alessandro Grella)
Scenes and material from current OSMP Natural
Selection Hikes (© OSMP)
The Passages des Princes (left) and Choiseul (right)
Part of Rio de Janeiro historical model (courtesy:
LAURD/PROURB/UFRJ)
Two screen images of Rio-H displaying an image of the
city in 1928 and today
Project unreality (courtesy: Andrew Dekker, Mark Hurst
and Erik Champion)
Spatial navigation with (left) and without narrative
model (right)
Photorealistic rendering of heritage sites: here the virtual
reconstruction of Place Garibaldi in Nice, France using
modelling-from-images techniques
Preparing the visitor for the experience is an integral part
of the “story”: (left) visitors queuing to enter the
pre-show at the British Museum’s “Mummy: The Inside
Story” exhibition; (right) the visitor information video at
the entrance of the Foundation of the Hellenic World’s
VR exhibits informs visitors while, at the same time,
raising expectations
ix

104
106
113
115
119
120

120

121
125
139
145
147
201
216

229

233

F I G U R E S AN D T AB L E S

14.3

14.4

16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5
16.6
16.7
17.1
17.2
17.3
17.4a
17.5a
17.6
17.7
17.8
17.9
17.10
18.1
18.2

18.3

Museum visitors use a haptic interface, built by
PERCRO, to reconstruct, piece-by-piece, a section of the
Doric temple of Ancient Messene in Greece
A robot character called “Spike” guides children through
the construction of a virtual playground by enacting a
pre-recorded sequence of actions
CD-ROM façade and cover
Main foyer
Catalogue room foyer
Modes of display in the catalogues
Architects foyer and example ‘gallery wall’ display
Map room
Index page and navigation buttons
Virupaksha temple, Hampi 2005
Augmented photographic scene, Hindu gods at Hampi
Panoramic scene projected into the AVIE, stereographic
display at scale
(Above) and 17.4b (Below). Roundshot VR panoramic
camera and ambisonic microphone in situ
(Above) and 17.5b (Below). Motion capture and the god
Shiva dancing as Nataraja, Place-Hampi 2006
Demonstrator 1. PLACE-HAMPI, installation premier
Lille3000 October 2006–January 2007
Navigating the virtual landscape of stereo cylinders¸
Place-Hampi 2006
Demonstrator 2, AVIE, detail, showing stereo projection
setup
Visitor participation and interaction captured by the
vision system in AVIE
Vision system creates voxel models visualization
Screen images of the Digital Songlines interface
Mt Moffatt cave paintings ‘The Tombs’. Archaeological
excavations have shown that Aboriginal people inhabited
these sandstone rock shelters for some 19,500 years
Screen image of animated ﬁsh with representative
contemporary indigenous art work

x

235

237
264
264
265
266
266
267
270
276
277
278
283
285
286
286
287
288
289
298

299
299

FIGURES AND TABLE S

Tables
2.1 Digital capture technologies
2.2 Accuracy of data
2.3 Data longevity
2.4 Proposed virtual heritage metadata
12.1 How new media can help new heritage

28
32
34
36
191

Cover image
The cover image depicts data from Square Tower House of Mesa Verde
National Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site in southwest Colorado.
Square Tower House is one of the architectural remains of the Ancient
Puebloan culture. In September 2007 CyArk executed a 3D laser survey
combined with high resolution photography to capture this monument
which has become subject to potential structural failure. This 3D point
cloud model will be used as a base line to monitor future movement and
to plan for stabilization procedures.
The nonproﬁt CyArk High Deﬁnition Heritage Network is a project of
the Kacyra Family Foundation, and was founded by the pioneer of long
range 3D laser scanning, Ben Kacyra. CyArk operates with the mission of
“Preserving cultural heritage sites through collecting, archiving, and providing open access via the internet to heritage data created by laser scanning,
digital modeling, and other state-of-the-art technologies.” Cultural heritage
site data from around the world, like that of Square Tower House, may be
viewed on the open access CyArk 3D Heritage Archive, www.cyark.org.

xi

CO N T RIBUT OR S

Alonzo C. Addison, UNESCO World Heritage Centre, 7 place de Fontenoy,
Paris 75352, France.
Janice Afﬂeck, The Department of Architecture, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR.
Nezar Alsayyad, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Architecture, 232 Wurster Hall #1800, Berkeley, CA 94720-1800.
Chris Barker, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. IEP, ITEE,
University of Queensland, Australia. Australian CRC for Interactive
Design (ACID) Australia.
Neil Brown, iCinema Centre for Interactive Cinema Research, The
University of New South Wales, P.O. Box 259, Paddington NSW,
Australia 2021.
Fiona Cameron, Centre for Cultural Research, University of Western
Sydney.
Erik M. Champion, Media and Design, UNSW-Asia, Tanglin Campus,
1 Kay Siang Rd, Singapore 248922.
Xiaolei Chen, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA.
Bharat Dave, Faculty of Architecture, Building and Planning, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville VIC 3010, Australia.
Dennis Del Favero, iCinema Centre for Interactive Cinema Research, The
University of New South Wales, P.O. Box 259, Paddington NSW,
Australia 2021.
Maria Economou, Department of Cultural Technology and Communication, University of the Aegean, Harilaou Trikoupi & Faonos Str,
Mytilene, 81 100, Greece.

xii

CONTRIBUTORS

Stephan Gard, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. IEP, ITEE,
University of Queensland, Australia. Australian CRC for Interactive
Design (ACID) Australia.
Elisa Giaccardi, Center for LifeLong Learning & Design (L3 D), University
of Colorado at Boulder, USA.
Yehuda Greenﬁeld-Gilat, SAYA Architecture and Consultancy, Hahad
Ha’am 7/1 Jerusalem, Israel.
James Hills, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. IEP, ITEE,
University of Queensland, Australia. Australian CRC for Interactive
Design (ACID) Australia.
Sarah Kenderdine, Museum Victoria, Melbourne Museum, Carlton
Gardens, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 3053.
Yehuda E. Kalay, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Architecture, 382A Wurster Hall, #1800, Berkeley, CA 94720-1800, USA.
Jose R. Kos, Graduate Program of Urban Design, Faculty of Architecture
and Urbanism, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Thomas Kvan, Faculty of Architecture, Building and Planning, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.
Brett Leavy, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. IEP, ITEE,
University of Queensland, Australia. Australian CRC for Interactive
Design (ACID) Australia.
Hannah Lewi, Faculty of Architecture, Building and Planning, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.
Jeff Malpas, School of Philosophy, University of Tasmania, Private Bag 41,
Hobart, Tasmania, 7001, Australia.
Laia Pujol Tost, Department of Cultural Technology and Communication,
University of the Aegean, Harilaou Trikoupi & Faonos Str, Mytilene,
81 100, Greece.
Sara Roegiers, Maerlant Centre, Faculteit Letteren K.U. Leuven, Blijde
Inkomststraat 21, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Maria Roussou, Makebelieve Creative Design and Consulting, Athens,
Greece.
Jeffrey Shaw, iCinema Centre for Interactive Cinema Research, The
University of New South Wales, P.O. Box 259, Paddington NSW,
Australia 2021.

xiii

C O NT R I B U T O R S

Neil Silberman, Ename Center for Public Archaeology and Heritage
Presentation, 13-15 Abdijstraat, B-9700 Ename, Belgium.
Frederik Truyen, Maerlant Centre, Faculteit Letteren K.U. Leuven, Blijde
Inkomststraat 21, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Theodor G. Wyeld, Queensland University of Technology, Australia.
IEP, ITEE, University of Queensland, Australia. Australian CRC for
Interactive Design (ACID) Australia.

xiv

P R E F AC E

Cultural heritage sites all over the world are under threat due to tourism,
aggressive urbanization, speculative development, conﬂict, and general
neglect. The complement of traditional methods to cultural heritage management has been augmented with the introduction of digital or new media.
Individual researchers, professional societies, museums, universities, and
governments have embraced computer modeling and visualization to create
virtual reconstructions and databases of living, threatened or lost cultural
heritage sites. These efforts have typically focused on the tangible aspects of
the site, in the form of 3D models. While these are important components,
they often fail to capture the complexity of intangible cultural heritage and
the related social, political and economic issues surrounding the sites or
artifacts.
Digital media could be utilized for much more than re-creation and
re-presentation of physical entities. It has the capacity to become a tool
to capture both the tangible and intangible essence of both the cultural
heritage and the society that created or used the sites.
Yehuda E. Kalay, Thomas Kvan, and Janice Afﬂeck,
March 2007

xv

I N T R O DU C T I O N
Preserving cultural heritage through
digital media
Yehuda E. Kalay

Abstract
The apparent limitless affordances of digital technologies
make them the choice media for the re-presentation, management, and dissemination of cultural heritage. Digital media are
used to create cultural content through scanning, modeling,
and archiving; to manage that content through powerful
search engines and database management tools; and to disseminate the content through the world wide web to audiences
who otherwise might never be able to access it. Yet, like every
medium ever used to preserve cultural heritage, digital media
is not neutral: it impacts the represented information and
the ways society interprets it. Perhaps more than any older
technology, it has the potential to affect the very meaning
of the represented content in terms of the cultural image it
creates. This chapter examines the affordances and implications of digital media for the preservation of cultural heritage
through two metaphorical paradigms: rounding a square peg
to ﬁt a round hole, versus the horseless carriage. The ﬁrst
implies a dysfunctional relationship between the media and
the task they are applied to, the later a misunderstanding of
the affordances of the media for changing the tasks themselves. Both paradigms are used to argue that much more
research is needed before we can unequivocally recommend
New Media as a vehicle for preservation of cultural heritage.

Introduction
Cultural heritage sites all over the world face rapid decline due to aggressive urban expansion, speculative development, wars, and general neglect.
In places where resources are available for their maintenance, emphasis
1

Y E H U D A E. K ALAY

is largely given to preservation of and improving access to major disused
sites, such as old palaces and temples. In other places, artifacts are moved
into (sometimes remote) museums, thereby separated from the context in
which they were found. Neither approach preserves the vibrant life of the
heritage – the way it appeared when the site was inhabited, except in paintings or static dioramas. As a result, examples of living heritage, such as
buildings in use, traditional everyday life and special ceremonies, are at
high risk of becoming lost.
A technology-driven alternative to preserving cultural heritage has
emerged through the advent of new, digital media. Individual researchers,
professional societies, museums, universities, and governments have
embraced the modeling and visualization abilities afforded by computers to
create re-constructions and databases of threatened or altogether lost cultural heritage. These efforts have typically focused on the sites themselves,
in the form of models of buildings and other structures, and the documents
and artifacts found therein. The new technology has the potential to move
the state of the art of preservation beyond static displays, capturing in cinematic or interactive form the social, cultural, and human aspects of the
sites and the societies who inhabited them.
Yet, paradoxically, the relative ease of creating digital re-constructions,
and media’s added data management and communication capabilities, have
accentuated and brought to the fore two questions that have been dogging
cultural heritage preservation all along:
1. What is the “appropriate” way of utilizing digital media in the service
of preserving cultural heritage?
2. What is the impact of digital media themselves on the content they
purport to preserve and to communicate?
Both questions pertain to current practices and future directions in which
to expand and re-deﬁne the scope and nature of digital media in the service
of cultural heritage. They also acknowledge that the choice of media has an
impact on the content it represents, and seek to understand those impacts
in relation to cultural heritage. The two questions are not independent of
each other: the very affordances of the media dictate, to a large extent,
what form the preservation will assume, and thus impacts on its content.
This chapter, therefore, treats the two questions as one.
The question of the impact of media on content is, of course, as old
as cultural preservation itself. The introduction of papyrus and vellum as
means of recording oral epics, such as Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey in the
sixth century BC, forced a standardization of what until then had been
a memorized collection of verses, performed and interpreted by the poet.
The codex (book), which began to substitute the scroll in the second century AD, allowed easier transport and maintenance of literary collections,
2

INTRODUCTION

but because it was at ﬁrst used to record everyday, low-level events, it
was considered inferior to the scroll. Hence, many of the more “serious”
literary works were never transcribed into the new format, and consequently were lost. The invention of the moveable type printing press by
Johann Guttenberg in the ﬁfteenth century directly contributed to the wide
dissemination of information in Europe, ushering, or at least supporting, the emergence of the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Age of
Enlightenment.
Much as these older media have impacted the preservation of cultural
heritage, the use of digital technology today raises questions that are
situated at the convergence of the arts, technologies, and socio-cultural
“memory-preserving” institutions (museums, libraries), challenging traditional notions of how cultural heritage can and should be represented,
interpreted, and disseminated. But the apparent limitless affordances of digital media make these questions more profound, affecting the very meaning
of the represented content in terms of the cultural image they create.
This chapter looks at these dual premises. On one hand, it examines
the affordances of digital media as means of re-presentation, management,
and dissemination of cultural heritage. On the other hand, it questions the
impact of digital media on the nature of the information it communicates –
in this case, cultural heritage. These questions form a kind of cost–beneﬁt
analysis: what is gained, what is lost? How does the media change the
content? Is this change beneﬁcial, or does it destroy the very culture it
attempts to assist?

Re-presentation
In his seminal book The Language of New Media (MIT Press 2001), Lev
Manovich identiﬁes ﬁve so-called general “principles” that characterize digital media: numerical presentation, modularity, automation, variability, and
transcoding (the ability to move information from one medium to another).
When applied to a speciﬁc domain, such as cultural heritage, these principles acquire speciﬁc meanings. The ability to represent environments and
artifacts in digital form makes it possible to manipulate the information in
both spatial and temporal ways, then transmit it to remote viewers who
have the power to further manipulate it. Digital re-presentation profoundly
inﬂuences content re-presentation, management, and communication. It
endows this new form of cultural heritage re-presentation with abilities
(i.e. affordances) that older forms of re-presentation could never achieve,
and consequently – with new interpretations.
Environments and artifacts that have fallen into disrepair can now be
re-constructed to their original glory at little cost. Even entire cities can be
digitally re-built, to a level of detail that depends only on the patience of the
artists. The reconstructed artifacts can be observed from any point of view
3

Y E H U D A E. K ALAY

(literally and metaphorically), at any degree of abstraction, at any time –
past, present, or future. They can be viewed under peace-time conditions
or at periods of national distress, in everyday or festive circumstances.
In addition to the physical artifacts themselves, the activities these sites
are used to support – for which they were created in the ﬁrst place – can
also be simulated, providing an “in-use” image which can be quite different
from “at rest” views. What use is a vast, empty throne room, unless it is
ﬁlled with glitter-attired dignitaries? How different is an empty coliseum
from one ﬁlled with the excitement – and gore – of gladiatorial games?
How empty are the streets of a model of ancient Olympia or medieval
Cairo compared to the hustle and bustle that characterized them in the
past?
The digital “re-construction” process, however, is quite different from
physical re-constructions. It sometimes begins with the actual remains, captured in digital form through photogrametry, laser scanning, or simply
measuring of what exists. This information is converted into 3D models,
complete with texture maps and weathering effects. When physical evidence
is scarce or controversial (for example, because it cannot be differentiated
from artifacts belonging to other periods), other means of re-construction
may be used. They include ancient maps, textual accounts of travelers
(a kind of ancient “news” articles), period paintings (after non-factual
embellishments have been removed), even MRI and CT scans of mummies or other remains.1 If the heritage is relatively young, interviews with
people familiar with site or events can be used to help artists ﬂesh out the
historical narrative (e.g., Spielberg’s Shoah Project).2
What makes this digital content creation possible is transcoding. Hence,
the 3D point clouds generated by laser scanning can be used to construct
3D surface models of sites and artifacts. Building contours traced on maps
can be extruded into walls, paintings and photographs can be literally
“mapped” over them to provide realistic or assumed textures. And travelers’ accounts can be choreographed to produce a living image of the
heritage, providing the script for people’s activities, customs, and rituals.
Yet each source presents different difﬁculties, even controversies. Laser
scanning – a highly accurate method – captures not only ancient artifacts
but also the many modiﬁcations and adaptations they have undergone
through the ages. Foundations and building contours – often the only
physical remains – must be completed into 3D structures, with little hard
evidence for what the buildings may have looked like at height. Travelers’
tales must be veriﬁed by correlating them to other, “reliable” sources, and
“cleaned up” from personal biases. Paintings must be scrutinized for artistic license, and MRIs only reveal the artifacts’ skeletal structures, not their
surface properties. Often, it is the very abundance of the information that
is a problem, rather than its scarcity: what to do about contradictory evidence? Which evidence should be kept, which discarded? The false realism
4

INTRODUCTION

assumed by the re-constructed image does not afford the vagueness and
abstraction of physical reconstructions; missing details must be ﬁlled in,
even when they are no better than guesswork, otherwise the entire model
is rendered useless.

Management
Historical re-construction is an inexact practice. Archaeologists rely on
a variety of sources, which are often incomplete and contradictory: documents may be missing, buildings may have been modiﬁed in unexpected
or unexplained ways, and artifacts may have been displaced or intermingled with ones from a different period or culture. The data also comes in
different levels of abstraction: from texts to maps to paintings to artifacts
to whole buildings. Reconciling all this information into a single, uniﬁed,
coherent narrative is often impossible.
Digital media can help: its discrete (rather than analog) nature lends it
the ability to deal with chunks of data, which can be stored separately
but linked to one another in meaningful ways. It is possible, therefore, to
connect a text to a speciﬁc building, and a found texture to one appearing in a painting. It is possible to connect existing buildings to similar
remains elsewhere, and ﬁll in missing details. This ability is known as data
management – the process for which computer technology has practically
been invented. But the relative ease of making such connections can lead
to less judicious scrutiny when making them. For example, when physical
books are shelved in a library, much thought must go into determining their
logical proximities. But when the books are virtual and the “shelving” is
digital, a search engine will easily retrieve correlated materials, as well as
nonsensical associations.
The relative low cost of creating digital re-constructions affords yet
another advantage: developing alternative narratives. Often, one interpretation of the historical evidence competes with another interpretation. The
prohibitive cost of physical conservation and restoration forces choosing one interpretation over another. But which expert’s interpretation is
more valid than another’s? Even if a consensus can be found, what seems
like a logical interpretation at one point in time may be contradicted by
newly discovered evidence, or better developed theories, at a later time,
forcing painful (and costly) reconciliation of past efforts with modern
understandings.3 Digital re-constructions, on the other hand, afford keeping multiple different interpretations side by side. Not only does such
“versioning” eliminate the need to choose one interpretation over another,
it also permits students and scholars to compare and contrast the different accounts, teaching them about evolution of the knowledge preservation
process itself. But which one of these side-by-side interpretations is more
valid?
5

Y E H U D A E. K ALAY

The relatively low-cost of digital re-construction and data storage also
affords storing vast quantities of data, which no physical site, museum,
or library could possibly store. And the ability to rapidly search the data
provides unparalleled abilities to correlate otherwise disparate evidence, to
the beneﬁt of constructing more complete – and possibly more accurate –
narratives of the past. But it also diminishes the power of ofﬁcial gatekeepers, such as academic journals, museums, and governmental agencies, and
opens the ﬂoodgates to “un-authorized” evidence and interpretations – the
product of amateurs or charlatans.
The ease of digital data storage and maintenance is paralleled by its
fragility. The problem of choosing which data to preserve, and which to
discard, has arisen every time transcoding was made possible by a new
medium. Which oral epics have been transcribed to scrolls, which ones were
not? Which scrolls were transcribed into books, which were not? Which
books were typeset, which were not? Which books will be scanned by the
Alexandria Digital Library Project,4 which will not? And then, what format
will be used to encode them digitally? What machines will be available 5,
10, 50, 100, 1000 years from now, to read the preserved data? How many
vinyl record players do we have access to today? Eight-track tapes? Video
tapes? 5-1/4 inch ﬂoppy disks? 3-1/2 inch ﬂoppies? In short, if the intent
of using New Media is to enhance the preservation of cultural heritage,
are we not entrusting our most precious possessions to the safekeeping of
a rather unproven, fragile technology, whose short history is replete with
discarding the “old” for the “new”?

Dissemination
Once captured in digital form, the content can be easily disseminated.
Everyone with access to a computer – and soon to a cell phone or to
a cable TV – will be able to view the data. But unlike traditional means of
dissemination, digital media presents viewers with the unique problems of
authenticity, interpretability, guidance, and contextuallity – or rather, lack
thereof.
One of the most powerful features of physical heritage is its authenticity: the ability to touch ancient walls, to literally walk in the footsteps of
some historical ﬁgure, or just to view – in an un-mediated way – artifacts
that were crafted by some ancient civilization. Such un-mediated engagement creates a palpable connection with the past; viewing the same places
and artifacts through the mediation of a computer monitor, does not. The
screen acts as a barrier, engendering a sense of detachment that encourages
disbelief. We have been conditioned from childhood to disbelieve what we
see on the screen – otherwise, it would be hard to watch gory ﬁlms and play
vicious computer games. The ability to manipulate what we see has been
exploited by special effects artists, as well as by unscrupulous advertisers.
6

INTRODUCTION

Polls taken after the ﬁrst Gulf War in the US have shown a detachment from
the action, a video-game-like feeling when seeing images taken through the
lens of smart bombs (Moore 2001).5
What will be the impact of video-based cultural heritage? Will it become
as believable as physical cultural heritage, or will it take on the detachment
of a video game? What are the consequences of lessening the believability
in our cultural heritage?
It is naïve to believe that the enormous effort involved in physical
re-construction and preservation of cultural heritage can be justiﬁed by
purely academic, cultural reasons. Individuals, organizations, and whole
nations use cultural heritage to justify present-day positions or claims.
It was the pretext used by countless nations to wage aggression against
other people, to justify continued occupations or to denounce them. Most
recently (1996), the discovery of the so-called Kennewick Man on the banks
of the Columbia River in the state of Washington – a 9,000 years old fossilized skeleton of a man whose life may prove false traditional theories
about the inhabitation of North America – has been fraught with court
battles intended to literally bury the evidence.6
Digitally reconstructed cultural heritage makes such political and other
claims easier to present and to justify.7 What guarantees do we have that
the version told by one New Heritage producer is more true and believable
than another’s?
Un-mediated and un-narrated access to cultural heritage renders it difﬁcult, if not impossible, to understand by the lay public: what is the
signiﬁcance of an arrowhead found in a particular site? What do the
markings on a stone wall mean, other than decoration? Why would
a small piece of pottery or parchment generate so much excitement? To
understand cultural heritage, lay people need guidance. Such guidance is
provided by the curators of the heritage, in the form of signage, guided
tours, audio-narration, guide books, and the like. Like most stories told,
these are linear narratives: they have a well-deﬁned beginning, middle,
and end.
Digital media, in contrast, puts much of the authority – and
responsibility – for constructing the narrative in the hands of the viewer.
For example, the ability to virtually “walk” through a model of an ancient
city may let the viewer visit sites out of the “prescribed” sequence, or ones
not intended for public viewing at all. The problem is further compounded
if the technology allows virtual time-travel, as the narrative may become
temporally, as well as spatially, confused. On one hand, such freedom to
explore the heritage at one’s own volition may be desired; there is nothing
more enjoyable (and instructive) than “getting lost” in some ancient city.
On the other hand, the overall understanding gained from a chaotic visit
may be jumbled, contributing little to the communication of the cultural
heritage.
7

Y E H U D A E. K ALAY

Moreover, the very effort needed to access a (physical) cultural heritage
site is instructive in and of itself. It often involves making travel arrangements, spending money and time, and considerable mental and physical
preparations. These efforts both contextualize the experience, and set the
mood for its understanding. Much like the difference between in-class learning and e-learning, the “event” of visiting a site is part of the cultural
experience. It conditions the visitor to partake in the experience, and thus
be more acutely attuned to it. The journey itself – whether ﬂying to another
country or trekking through a jungle – provides a larger context to the
experience.
The instant access provided by digital media strips away these “conditioning” and “contextualizing” preconditions from the experience. They
render the event of cultural heritage more sterile, more detached, and less
engaging. The cultural experience must contend with other worldly contexts, such as being immersed in one’s own culture while learning about
another’s, or being in no context at all,8 which competes for attention and
is thus distracting, at the very least.

Conclusion
Digital re-constructions of sites, artifacts, people and their activities bring
new affordances to the practice of preservation and communication of
cultural heritage. The New Media’s properties of numerical presentation,
modularity, automation, variability, and transcoding affect each aspect of
the creation, management, and dissemination of cultural heritage. But its
critical implications are not limited to supporting the technical aspects of
the practice. Rather, they have the power to transform it, wholesale.
The relationship between a technology, its affordance, and a practice
can be understood in terms of two different paradigms. The ﬁrst is that
of forcing a square peg into a round hole – implying that the use of
the new technology is misdirected, or at least poorly ﬁts the practice to
which it is applied. In doing so, the practice suffers. The potentials and
pitfalls of applying New Media to cultural heritage, described above, can
be understood in terms of this paradigm.
But another paradigm may be even more instructive in understanding
the implications of applying New Media to the practice of cultural heritage
preservation. It describes a state of transformation where the application
of the new technology is viewed through obsolete and “backward” terms,
much like the automobile was viewed as a horseless carriage in the early
days of the twentieth century. It implies a lack of appreciation for the
emerging potentials of technology to change the practice to which it is
applied.
The application of a new technology to current practices often produces
a dysfunctional relationship between the tools and a task, either because
8

INTRODUCTION

the task is poorly understood or because the process of displacing a set of
traditional technologies is largely one of the substitution of habitual tools
with new ones that have the wrong affordances. Understanding this misﬁt (and resolving the dysfunction it brings in its wake) requires a clear
identiﬁcation of the different actions that comprise the practice, and developing tools that can truly assist it – what amounts to “rounding off” the
square peg.
The “horseless carriage” paradigm views technology as a means to alter
the perception of a practice about itself, as it is transformed by a new
technology. In using the term a “horseless carriage” at the turn of the
twentieth century, the practice of transportation has been described through
the lens of a previous technology, not realizing that travel had been dramatically changed. Understanding this paradigm requires asking different
questions than those required by the ﬁrst paradigm. Rather than how
can the new technology assist the practice and how to avoid its pitfalls,
the question to be asked is how can the affordances provided by the
new technology change the practice itself? Do we understand how having what appears to be more precision in modeling cultural heritage affect
our reasoning about culture? Do we understand how digitally-mediated
communication fundamentally changes the interpretation of the represented
culture? How does cultural knowledge, once invested only in professionals, but now ingrained in the digital artists who create the re-constructions,
affect the practice of cultural heritage preservation? Both paradigms assume
that the fundamental task does not change (i.e. the task of preserving
and communication cultural heritage). But unlike the ﬁrst paradigm, the
second one assumes that the practice of preservation and communication is not only assisted, but is changed through the inﬂuence of the new
technologies.
In both paradigms, the technology is connected to an image of practice.
This image is comprised of a collection of methods, habits, organizations,
knowledge, and a culture of preservation. Professionals often hold such an
image of their practice, but not always explicitly. They may know how
something is done, but are less aware of the values implicit in a particular
way of working. New Media experts (modelers, animators, programmers)
also hold an image of practice. Not being cultural preservationists themselves (with few exceptions), their image of the practice of cultural heritage
preservation is articulated in the assumptions they make about the kinds of
methods and approaches needed to execute that practice. Both paradigms
require an explicit understanding of the technology’s affordances in relationship to the practice. But, according to the second paradigm, both
cultural heritage experts and New Media specialists have the added responsibility to understand the implicit embodiment of the values associated with
the practice in the tools they use, and their reciprocal inﬂuence on each
other, in terms of shaping New Cultural Heritage.
9

Y E H U D A E. K ALAY

Notes
1 Consider, for instance: “Study of Kennewick Man,” New York Times
July 22, 2005; and “Unraveling the mysteries of King Tutankhamun,”
http://magma.nationalgeographic.com/ngm/tut/mysteries/forensics.html.
2 http://www.vhf.org/
3 Consider, for example, the evolving (physical) model of Jerusalem in AD 66,
which had to be modiﬁed numerous times to keep up with new archaeological
discoveries (http://www.inisrael.com/holyland/model.html).
4 http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/
5 “New Tools Showed Gulf War on TV,” Frazier Moore, Washington Post,
Sunday, Jan 14, 2001 (http://chotank.com/frazmoore.html).
6 See the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture web site at:
http://www.washington.edu/burkemuseum/kman/kman_home.htm
7 See, for example: http://www.malepregnancy.com/
8 Consider for instance the “edge of the world” effect in the 1999 movie “The
Thirteenth Floor,” Sony Pictures Home Entertainment.

10

References
1 CULTURAL HERITAGE IN THE AGE OF NEW
MEDIA
Benjamin, W. 1969 (originally 1936). The Work of Art in the
Age of Mechanical Reproduction. In Illuminations, ed.
Hannah Arendt. New York: Schocken Books.
Borges, J.L. 1998. Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote. In
Collected Fictions. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Gadamer, H.G. 1989. Truth and Method. 2nd rev. edn, trans.
J. Weinsheimer and D.G. Marshall. New York: Crossroad.
Heidegger, M. 1971. The Thing. Trans. Albert Hofstadter. In
Poetry, Language, Thought. New York: Harper & Row.
Malpas, J. 2007. Heidegger’s Topology: Being, Place, World.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Malpas, J. (forthcoming). “The Role of Memory”: Image,
Place and Story in the Films of Wim Wenders. In Film and
Philosophy, ed. James Phillips. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Meyrowitz, J. 1985. No Sense of Place. The Impact of
Electronic Media on Social Behaviour. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tilden, F. 1977. Interpreting Our Heritage. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina. (Originally published 1957.)
UNESCO. 2003. Convention for the Safeguarding of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage, Paris.
Wenders, W. 2003. In Defense of Places. DGA Magazine 28
(3). Internet. Available from
http://www.dga.org/news/v28_4/craft_wendersplaces.php3
accessed December 2005.

2 THE VANISHING VIRTUAL: Safeguarding
heritage’s endangered digital record
Addison, A.C. 2000. Emerging Trends in Virtual Heritage.
IEEE MultiMedia, April–June 2000 7 (2): 22–25.
Free Software Foundation. 2006. What is Copyleft? – GNU
Project – Free Software Foundation. Internet. Available
from http://www.gnu.org/copyleft accessed in 2006.
Taisei Corporation. 2006. Ancient Civilizations project
website. Internet. Available from
UNESCO (United Nations, Educational, Scientiﬁc, and
Cultural Organization). 1972. Convention Concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage.
Internet. Available from
http://whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext Disclaimer
The author is solely responsible for the choice and the
presentation of
the facts and for the opinions expressed herein, which are
not necessarily
those of, and do not commit, UNESCO or any other
organization.

3 VIRTUAL HERITAGE: Mediating space, time
and perspectives
Internet Archive. 2006. Frequently Asked Questions.
Internet. Available from http://www.archive.org/ accessed
15 January 2006.
Ivins, W. M. 1985. Prints and Visual Communication.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Latour, B. 1986. Visualization and cognition: thinking with
eyes and hands. Knowledge and Society: Studies in the
Sociology of Culture Past and Present 6: 1–40.
Latour, B. 1990. Drawing things together. In Representation
in Scientiﬁc Practice, eds Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 50.
Library of Congress. 1993. Rome Reborn: The Vatican Library
and Renaissance Culture. Washington: Library of Congress.
Internet. Available from
http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/vatican/ accessed 15 January
2006.
Lowenthal, D. 1985. The Past is a Foreign Country.
Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lyman, P. and Varian, H. R. 2003. HOW MUCH INFORMATION
2003? Berkeley: School of Information Management and
Systems at the University of California at Berkeley.
Internet. Available from http://www.sims.
berkeley.edu/research/projects/how-muc-info-2003/ accessed
15 January 2006.
Miralab. 2005. University of Geneva, Switzerland. Internet.
Available from http://www.miralab.unige.ch/ accessed 15
January 2006.
Moltenbrey, K. 2001. Preserving the Past. Computer Graphics
World September 24 (9): 24–30.
Molyneaux, B., ed. 1997. The Cultural Life of Images:
Visual Representation in Archaeology. London: Routledge.
Owen, R., Buhalis, D., and Pletinckx. 2004. Identifying
technologies used in Cultural Heritage. In The 5th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and
Cultural Heritage VAST 2004, eds K. Cain, Y. Chrysanthou,
N. Sliberman and F. Niccolucci. Brussels: Eurographics
Association, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, pp. 155–163.

Silberman, N. 2004. Beyond Theme Parks and Digitized Data:
What can Cultural Heritage Technologies Contribute to the
Public Understanding of the Past? Interdisciplinarity or
the Best of Both Worlds. VAST 2004: The 5th International
Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archeology and Cultural
Heritage 2004, eds Y. C. K. Cain, F. Niccolucci, D.
Pletinckx, and N. Silberman. Brussels: EPOCH Publication,
pp. 9–12.
Stille, A. 2002. The Future of the Past: The Loss of
Knowledge in the Age of Information. London: Picador.
Taisei Corporation. 2001. Ancient Civilization City-State
Virtual Trip. Japan: Taisei Corporation. Internet.
Available from http://www.taiseikodaitoshi.com/enter_e.html
accessed 15 January 2006.
Vlahakis, V., Karigiannis, J., Almeida, L., Stricker, D.,
Gleue, T., Christou, I. T., Carlucci, R., and Ioannidis, N.
2001. Archeoguide: First results of an augmented reality,
mobile computing system in cultural heritage sites. In
Virtual Reality, Archaeology, and Cultural Heritage:
Proceedings of the 2001 conference on Virtual reality,
archaeology, and cultural heritage (Glyfada, Greece), New
York: ACM Press, pp. 131–140. Wishna, V. 2005. A New Look
at Old Buildings. Humanities March–April 26 (2): 46–49.
Woodwark, J. 1991. Reconstructing History with Computer
Graphics. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 11(1):
18–20.

4 THROUGH FORM AND CONTENT: New media
components and cultural heritage sites
management, in the Jewish traditional
society
Albright, W.F. 1963. The Archaeology of Palestine.
Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books.
Benhabib, S. 1996. ed. Democracy and Difference. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bourdieu, P. 1984. Distinctions. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bourdieu, P. 1995. Sur La Television, trans. Neri Sevenier.
Tel Aviv: Babel Publishing.
Eliade, M. 1959. The Sacred and the Profane. New York:
Harcourt.
Geertz, C. 1983. Local Knowledge. New York: Basic Books.
Kymlicka, W. 2001. Politics in the Vernacular. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. Malinowski, B. 1984. The Role of
Myth in Life. In Sacred Narrative, ed. Alan Dundes.
Berkeley, CA: University of California at Berkeley Press.
Parsons, T. 1963. Introduction. In: Weber, Max, Sociology
of Religion, trans. E. Fischoff. Boston: Beacon Press.
White, H. 1986. Tropics of Discourse. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

5 HISTORY IS 3D: Presenting a framework
for meaningful historical representations
in digital media
Bernstein, M.C. 1996. Hypertext and the Linearity of
History. Internet. Available from
http://www.eastgate.com/HypertextNow/archives/History.html
accessed 15 December 2006.
Bolter, J.D. 1991. Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext
and the History of Writing. Hillsday, Hove and London:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Bolter, J.D. and Grusin, R.
1999. Remediation – Understanding New Media. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. Britt, M.A., Rouet, J.-F. and Perfetti, C.A.
1996. Using hypertext to study and reason about historical
evidence. In Hypertext and Cognition. eds. J.-F. Rouet,
J.J. Levonen, A.P. Dillon and R.J. Spiro. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, pp. 43, 72. Bush, V. 1945. As we may
think. Athlantic Monthly. CLXXVI 1: 106–107. Internet.
Available from
http://www.ps.uni-sb.de/∼duchier/pub/vbush/vbush.shtml
accessed 15 December 2006. Canadian Heritage Information
Network (CHIN). Knowledge Exchange. Internet. Available
from
http://www.chin.gc.ca/English/Knowledge-Exchange/accessed
15 December 2006. Chaney, D. 1994. The Cultural Turn:
Scene-setting Essays on Contemporary Cultural History.
London and New York: Routledge. Davis, B.H. 2000. Virtual
worlds as content-clocks for cultural memory. In Virtual
Heritage. Information portal for technology in cultural,
natural and world heritage. Internet. Available from
http://www.virtualheritage.net/ library/doc.cfm?DOCID=52
accessed 15 December 2006. De Keyser, R., Rogiers, K. and
Truyen, F. 1998. Historical skills and ICT. Informations.
International Society for History Didactics. 18
(September): 107–120. De Keyser, R., Truyen, F., Van Looy,
J., Rogiers, K., Cousserier, A. and Honoré, I. 2000. The
Legacy of Nikolaas Rockox. Antwerp: From Economic Capital
of the Netherlands to World Famous Art Centre. Leuven:
Universitaire Pers. CD-ROM. Driscoll, M. 2000. Psychology
of Learning for Instruction. Needham Heights: Allyn &
Bacon. Electronic Cultural Atlas Initiative (ECAI).
International and Area Studies. Berkeley: University of
California at Berkeley. Internet. Available from
http://www.ecai.org/ accessed 15 December 2006. Gredler,
M.E. 1997. Learning and Instruction: Theory into Practice
3rd edn. Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall. Landow, G.P.
1997. Hypertext 2.0: The Convergence of Contemporary
Critical Theory and Technology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press. Lave, J. and Wenger, E. 1991. Situated

Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. Mirzoeff, N. ed. 1999. Visual
Culture Reader. New York and London: Routledge. Murray,
J.H. 1992. Restructuring space, time, story and text in
advanced multimedia environments. In Sociomedia:
Multimedia, Hypermedia and the Social Construction of
Knowledge, ed. Edward Barrett. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp.
319–345. Murray, J.H. 1997. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The
Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. New York: Free Press.
Murray, J.H. 2003. Inventing the medium. In The New Media
Reader, eds. Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Nick Montfort.
Cambridge and London: MIT Press, pp. 3–11. Schiltz, M.,
Truyen, T. and Coppens, H. 2007. Cutting the trees of
knowledge: social software, information architecture, and
their epistemic consequences. Thesis Eleven. 89: 94–114.
Shafer, R.J. 1974. A Guide to Historical Method. The Dorsey
Press: Illinois.
Spiro, Rand J., Feltovich, P.J., Jacobson, M.J. and
Coulson, R.L. 1992. Cognitive Flexibility, Constructivism,
and Hypertext: Random Access Instruction for Advanced
knowledge Acquisition in ill-structured Domains. In
Constructivism and the Technology of Instruction: A
Conversation, ed. M.D. Thomas, and H.J. David. Hillsdale:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 57–76.
Staley, D.J. 1998. From writing to associative assemblages:
“History” in an electronic culture. In Writing, Teaching
and Researching History in the Electronic Age. Historians
and Computers, ed. Dennis A. Trinkle. Armonk, NY and
London: M.E. Sharpe, pp. 3–13.
Von Ranke, L. 1824. Geschichten der Romanischen und
Germanischen Völker von 1494 bis 1514. Leipzig/Berlin.
Von Ranke, L. 1839. Vorrede zur Deutschen Geschichte.
Berlin.
Wenger, E. 1998. Communities of Practice: Learning,
Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
White, H. Historiography and Historiophoty. Screening the
Past. Special issue: AHR revisited, 6 (1988 and 1999).
Internet. – Available from
Wineburg, S. 2001. Historical Thinking and Other Unnatural
Acts: Charting the Future of Teaching the Past.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Yellowlees, Douglas, J. 2000. The End of Books or Books
without End? Reading Interactive Narratives. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

6 CHASING THE UNICORN?: The quest for
“essence” in digital heritage
Preston, R. 2005. Art and Science: Capturing the Unicorn.
In The New Yorker. Internet. Available from
http://www.newyorker.com/printables/ fact/050411fa_fact
accessed 11 April 2005.
Seaton, A.V., and Bennett, M.M. 1996. Marketing of Tourism
Products: Concepts, Issues and Cases. London: Thomson
Business Press.
Urry, J. 2002. The Tourist Gaze. London: Sage Publications.

7 MEMORY CAPSULES: Discursive
interpretation of cultural heritage
through new media
Frischer, B., Niccolucci, F., Ryan, N., and Barcelo, J.
2000. From CVR to CVRO: The Past, Present and Future of
Cultural Virtual Reality. In VAST 2000: International
Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent
Cultural Heritage, Arezzo, Italy 24–26 November 2000, ed.
F. Niccolucci. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Geser, G., Hazan, S., Karp, C., Kasteren, V., Spinazzé, A.,
Steemson, M., and Wood, H. 2004. Virtual Communities and
Collaboration in the Heritage Sector. DigiCULT Thematic
Issues 5. Salzburg: DigiCULT.
Gillings, M. 2000. Virtual Archaeologies and the
Hyper-real. In Virtual Reality in Geography, eds D. Unwin
and P. Fisher. London: Taylor & Francis.
Hewison, R. 1989. Heritage: an Interpretation. In Heritage
Interpretation. Volume 1: The Natural and Built
Environment. ed. D. Uzzell. London: Belhaven Press.
Hooper-Greenhill, E. 1994. Museum Communication: An
Introductory Essay. In The Educational Role of the Museum,
ed. E. Hooper-Greenhill. London: Routledge, pp. 9–16.
Howard, P. 2003. Heritage: Management, Interpretation,
Identity. London: Continuum.
Kollock, P. 1999. The Economies of Online Cooperation:
Gifts and Public Goods in Cyberspace. In Communities in
Cyberspace, eds M. Smith and P. Kollock. London: Routledge.
Lowenthal, D. 1985. The Past is a Foreign Country.
Cambridge: Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge.
Mason, R. 2005. Museums, Galleries and Heritage. Sites of
Meaning-making and Communication. In G. Corsane ed.
Heritage, Museums and Galleries: An Introductory Reade.
Oxon: Routledge, pp. 200–214.
Rheingold, H. 2000. The Virtual Community: Homesteading on
the Electronic Frontier. London. Internet. Available from
http://www.rheingold.com/vc/book/ intro.html accessed 29
September 2006.
Riviere, G.H. 1985. The Ecomuseum – an Evolutive Deﬁnition.
Museum, 34 (4): 182–183.

Stake, R.E. 1995. The Art of Case Study Research.
California: Sage Publications.
Teather, E.K. and Chow, C.S. 2003. Identity and Place: the
Testament of Designated Heritage in Hong Kong.
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 9 (2): 93–115.
Tringham, R. 2005. Putting Vision in its
Interweaving of Senses to Create a Sense
Çatalhöyük. In Seeing the Past: Building
Past and Present through Acts of Seeing.
Archaeology Center, Stanford University.

Place: the
of Place at
Knowledge of the
Stanford:

UNESCO. 2003. Charter on the Preservation of the Digital
Heritage. 32nd Session: The General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization. Paris: UNESCO.
Uzzell, D. 1994. Heritage Interpretation in Britain Four
Decades after Tilden. In Manual of Heritage Management, ed.
R. Harrison., Oxford: ButterworthHeinemann, pp. 293–302.
Yin, R.K. 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
California: Sage Publications.

8 CROSS-MEDIA INTERACTION FOR THE VIRTUAL
MUSEUM: Reconnecting to natural heritage
in Boulder, Colorado
Adams, D. and Goldbard, A. 2001. Creative community: The
art of community development. New York: Rockefeller
Foundation.
Arias, E., Eden, H. Fischer, G. Gorman, A., and Scharff, E.
2000. Transcending the individual human mind: Creating
shared understanding through collaborative design. ACM
Transactions on Computer Human-Interaction, 7 (1): 84–113.
Bannon, L., Benford, S. Bowers, J., and Heath, C. 2005.
Hybrid design creates innovative museum experiences.
Communications of the ACM, 48 (3): 62–65.
Benedetti, B. 2002. Virtuality and reality in enterprise’s
museum, art museum, archeological sites. Quaderni della
Fondazione Piaggio, Nuova Serie: Cultura Europea e Musei, 6
(1): 42–73. Benford, S., Greenhalgh, C. Reynard, G. Brown,
C., and Koleva, B. 1998. Understanding and constructing
shared spaces with mixed-reality boundaries. ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 5 (3):
185–223. Bowker, G.C. and Star, S.L., 1999. Sorting things
out: Classiﬁcation and its consequences. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. Chalmers, M., and Galani, A. 2004. Seamful
interweaving: Heterogenity in the theory and design of
interactive systems. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Designing Interactive Systems
(DIS 2004). New York: ACM Press, pp. 243–252. Crabtree, A.
2004. Design in the absence of practice: Breaching
experiments. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS 2004). New
York: ACM Press, pp. 59–68. de Varine-Bohan, H. 1996. The
museum in the fourth dimension. Nordisk Museologi, 96 (2):
51–56. Dix, A., Friday, A. Koleva, B. Rodden, T. Muller, H.
Randell, C., and Steed, A. 2005. Managing multiple spaces.
In Spaces, spatiality and technology, ed. P. Turner and E.
Davenport. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, pp.
151–172. Dourish, P. 2006. Re-space-ing place: “Place” and
“space” ten years on. In Proceedings of 20th anniversary
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW
2006). New York: ACM Press, pp. 299–308. Fischer, G. 2005.
Distances and diversity: Sources for social creativity. In
Proceedings of the Creativity & Cognition Conference 2005.
New York: ACM Press, pp. 128–136. Fischer, G., and
Giaccardi, E. 2006. Meta-design: A framework for the future
of end-user development. In End user development:
Empowering people to ﬂexibly employ advanced information

and communication technology. eds H. Lieberman, F. Paternò,
and V. Wulf. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, pp. 421–452. Fischer, G., Giaccardi, E. Eden,
H. Sugimoto, M., and Ye, Y. 2005. Beyond binary choices:
Integrating individual and social creativity. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies (IJHCS) Special Issue on
Computer Support for Creativity, eds E.A. Edmonds and L.
Candy, 63 (4–5): 482–512. Gaia, G., Boiano, S., and
Pasquali, F. 2005. Cross media: When the web doesn’t go
alone. In Proceedings of Museums & the Web 2005. Internet.
Available from
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2005/papers/gaia/gaia.html
Gaver, W.W. 2002. Designing for Homo Ludens. I3 Magazine,
12 (June): 2–6. Giaccardi, E. 2004. Memory and territory:
New forms of virtuality for the museum. In Proceedings of
Museums & the Web 2004. Internet. Available from
Heath, C., Luff, P. Vom Lehn, D. Hindmarsh, J., and
Cleverly, J. 2002. Crafting participation: Designing
ecologies, conﬁguring experience. Visual Communication, 1
(1): 9–34.
Jennings, P. 2005. Tangible social interfaces: Critical
theory, boundary objects and interdisciplinary design
methods. In Proceedings of the Creativity & Cognition
Conference 2005. New York: ACM Press, pp. 176–186.
Kato, K. 2006. Community, connection and conservation:
Intangible cultural values in natural heritage – the case
of Shirakami-sanchi World Heritage Area. International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 12 (5): 458–473.
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, B. 2004. Intangible heritage as
metacultural production. Museum International, 56 (1–2):
52–65.
Kraus, B.L. 2002. Wild soundscapes: Discovering the voice
of the natural world. Berkeley, CA: Wilderness Press.
Miskelly, C., and Fleuriot, C. 2006. Layering community
media in place. Digital Creativity, 17 (3): 163–173.
Plumwood, V. 2002. Environmental culture: The ecological
crisis of reason. London: Routledge.
Rodman, M. 2003. Empowering place: Multilocality and
multivocality. In The anthropology of space and place:
Locating culture, eds S. Low and L. LaurenceZuniga. Malden,
MA: Blackwell, pp. 205–223.

Schafer, R.M. 1977. The Tuning of the world. Indian River,
Canada: Arcana Editions.
Schech, S., and Haggis, S. 2000. Culture and development: A
critical introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
Schön, D. 1992. Designing as reﬂective conversation with
the materials of a design situation. Knowledge-Based
Systems Journal, 5 (1): 3–14.
Shneiderman, B., Fischer, G. Czerwinski, M. Resnick, M.
Myers, B., and 13 others. 2006. Creativity support tools:
Report from a U.S. National Science Foundation sponsored
workshop. International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction, 20 (2): 61–77.
UNESCO. 2005. Report of the expert meeting on inventorying
intangible cultural heritage, Paris, March 17–18, 2005.
Internet. Available from http://portal.unesco.org/
Vogiazou, Y., Reid, J. Raijmakers, B., and Eisenstadt, M.
2006. A research process for designing ubiquitous social
experiences. In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on
Human-computer interaction (NordiCHI ‘06). New York: ACM
Press, pp. 86–94.

9 EXPERIENCING THE CITY THROUGH A
HISTORICAL DIGITAL SYSTEM
ABACUS, 2001. Glasgow2000. The Story of the City. Glasgow:
Scran (CD-ROM).
ABACUS. 2003. TheGlasgowStory. Internet. Available from:
http:// www.TheGlasgowStory.com (the website was reviewed
before it was ofﬁcially launched, at
http://www.theglasgowstory.com/ﬁnal in September 2003).
Afﬂeck, J. and Thomas, K. 2005. Reinterpreting Virtual
Heritage. In CAADRIA 2005 Conference Proceedings. ed. A.
Bhatt. New Delhi, pp. 169–178.
Benjamin, W. 1982. Das Passagen-Werk. ed. R. Tiedemann.
Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Benjamin, W. 1978. Briefe. 2 vols. eds G. Scholem, and T.W.
Adorno. Fernktfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1970. Quoted
in Susan Buck-Morss. 1991. The Dialectics of Seeing: Walter
Benjamin and the Arcades Project. Boston: MIT Press.
Benjamin, W. 1999. The Arcades Project. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Benjamin, W. and Passagen-Werk, D. 1982. ed. R. Tiedemann,
Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Bolle, W. 1998. A Metrópole como médium-de-reﬂexão. Semear,
Number 3, Rio de Janeiro. Internet. Available from Cátedra
Padre António Vieira database. Available from
Buck-Morss, S. 1991. The Dialectics of Seeing: Walter
Benjamin and the Arcades Project. Boston: MIT Press.
Burke, P. 1991. History of Events and the Revival of
Narrative. In New Perspectives on Historical Writing. ed.
Peter Burke. University Park: The Pennsylvania State
University, pp. 233–248.
Burke, P. 2001. Eyewitnessing: the Uses of Images as
Historical Evidence. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Bush, V. 1945. As We May Think. The Atlantic Monthly. July.
Davis, N. 1983. The Return of Martin Guerre. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press. Quoted in Peter Burke. 1991.
History of Events and the Revival of Narrative. In New
Perspectives on Historical Writing, ed. P. Burke.

University Park: The Pennsylvania State University, pp.
233–248.
Eiland, H. and McLaughlin, K. 1999. Translators’ Foreword.
The Arcades Project. Walter Benjamin. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, pp. xix–xiv.
Ennis, G. and Thomas, M. 2001. Visit VR Glasgow – Welcoming
multiple visitors to the Virtual City in Architectural
Information Management: 19th eCAADe Conference Proceedings,
ed. Hannu Pentilä: Helsinki. Geertz, C. 1973. The
Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Koolhaas, R. 1994. Delirious New York: a Retroactive
Manifesto for Manhattan. New York: The Monacelli Press.
Kurosawa, A. 1950. Rashomon. Film produced by Daiei Co.
(2002 DVD version, The Criterion Collection). Kurosawa, A.
2002. Akira Kurosawa on Rashomon: from Something like an
Autobiography. In Rashomon DVD booklet. The Criterion
Collection. Price, R. 1990. Alabi’s World. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press. Seamon, D. 1998. Goethe, nature
and phenomenology: an introduction. In Goethe’s Way of
Science: A Phenomenology of Nature, eds D. Seamon and A.
Zajonc. Albany: State University of New York Press, pp.
1–14. Shields, R. 1996. A Guide to Urban Representation and
what to do about it: Alternative Traditions of Urban
Theory. In Re-presenting the City: Ethnicity, Capital and
Culture in the 21st-century Metropolis, ed. A. King. New
York: New York University Press, pp. 227–252. Stefanovic,
I. 1998. Phenomenological encounters with place: Cavtat to
Square One. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 18(1):
31–44. Stone, L. 2001. The revival of narrative: Reﬂections
on a new old history. In The History and Narrative Reader,
ed. G. Roberts. London and New York: Routledge, pp.
281–298. Vigne, D. 1982. Le Retour de Martin Guerre. Film
produced by Société Francaise de Production
Cinematographique, Paris (The Return of Martin Guerre, 1997
DVD version, Fox Lorber Video). White, H. 1966, The Burden
of History, History and Theory, 5. Reprinted in Tropics of
Discourse, ed. H. White, 1983. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, pp. 27–50. White, H. 1978. The Historical
Text as Literary Artifact. In Topics of Discourse: Essays
in Cultural Criticism, ed. H. White. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, pp. 81–87. White, H. 1988.
Historiography and Historiophoty. American Historical
Review 93. 1193–1199. Internet. Available from
http://www.latrobe.edu.au/
screeningthepast/reruns/rr0499/hwrr6c.htm accessed December
2005.

10 CONSUMING HERITAGE OR THE END OF
TRADITION: The new challenges of
globalization
Judd, D. and Fainstein, S. 1999. Cities as places to play.
In The Tourist City. eds D. Judd and S. Fainstein. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Mathews, G. 2000. Global Culture/Individual Identity:
Searching for Home in the Cultural Supermarket. London and
New York: Routledge.
Mitchell, T. 2002. McJihad: Islam in the US global order.
Social Text, 20 (4): 1–18.
Ohmae, K. 1995. The End of the Nation-State. New York: The
Free Press.
Reichl, A. 1999. Reconstructing Times Square: Politics and
Culture in Urban Development. Lawrence: University Press of
Kansas.
Robin, K. 1997. What in the World’s Going on? In Production
of Culture: Cultures of Production, ed. Paul de Gay.
London: SAGE Publications.
Upton, D. 1993. The Tradition of Change. Traditional
Dwellings and Settlements Review, 5 (1): 5–18.

11 THE POLITICS OF HERITAGE AUTHORSHIP:
The case of digital heritage collections
Baudrillard, J. 1994. Simulacra and Simulation. Trans.
Sheila Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan
Press.
Baudrillard, J. 2000. The Vital Illusion. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Benjamin, W. 1968. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction. Trans. H. Zohn. London: Jonathon Cape, 1970.
In Iluminations: The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction. UK: Fontana Press, 1968. Internet. Available
from http://pixels.ﬁlmv.ucla.edu/gallery/web/julian_scaff/
benjamin/benjamin.htm
Bennett, T. 1995. The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory,
Politics. London: Routledge.
Bennett, T. 1998. Culture: A Reformer’s Science, Sydney:
Allen and Unwin.
Bournia, A. and Eleni, M. 2006. ‘The textual, the virtual
and the real: where the past meets the present and the
future of museums’. Paper presented at The Museum: The
World Forum 25–27 April 2006, unpubished ms.
Brown, D. 2006. Te Ahua Hiko: Digital Cultural Heritage and
Indigenous Objects, People, and Environments. In Digital
Cultural Heritage: A Critical Discourse. Eds F. Cameron and
S. Kenderdine. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Cameron, F.R and Chan, S. 2006. OPAC 2 and Design Hub.
Paper presented at the Digital Collections Summit, Adelaide
18 August 2006.
Cameron, F. and Helena, R. 2007. Digital Knowledgescapes:
Theoretical, Cultural, Practical, and Usage Issues Facing
Museum Collection Databases in a Digital Epoch. In
Theorizing Digital Cultural Heritage: a critical discourse,
eds Fiona Cameron and Sarah Kenderdine. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Cannon-Brookes, P. 1992. The nature of museum collections.
In Manual of Curatorship: a guide to museum practice, ed.
J. Thompson., 2nd edn, London: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Chakrabathy, D. 2002. Museums in Late Democracies.
Humanities Research IX (1): 5–12.

Chan, S. 2007. Tagging and Searching – Serendipity and
museum collection databases. Museums and the Web 2007. San
Francisco, CA. April: 11–14.
〈http://www.archimuse.com/mw2007/papers/chan/chan.html〉
Collections Council of Australia. 2006. Summit on Digital
Collections Working Papers. Collections Council of
Australia.
Crary, J. 2001. Suspension of Perception: Attention,
Spectacle, and Modern Culture. Cambridge, London, Boston:
The MIT Press.
Davison, G. 2000. The Use and Abuse of Australian History.
Sydney: Allen and Unwin.
Foucault, M. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the
Prison. New York: Pantheon Books
Foucault, M. 1988. Technologies of Self (A seminar with
Michel Foucault at the University of Vermont, October
1982). In Technologies of Self: A seminar with Michel
Foucault, eds L.H. Martin, H. Gutman and P.H. Hutton.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. Fyfe, G. 2005.
Reproduction, cultural capital and museums: aspects of the
culture of Copies. Museum and Society, 2 (1) (March):
47–67. Gramsci, A. 1971. Selections from the Prison
Notebooks (selected and translated by Q. Hoare and G.
Lovell-Smith). London: Lawrence and Wishart. Hall, S. 2005.
Whose Heritage? Un-Settling “The Heritage”, Reimagining the
PostNation.In The Politics of Heritage: The Legacies of
“Race”, eds Jo Littler and Roshi Naidoo. London: Routledge,
pp 23–35. Hartog, F. 2005. Time and Heritage. Museum 227,
57 (3): 7–18. Kreps, C. 2003. Liberating Culture:
cross-cultural perspectives on museums, curation and
heritage preservation. London: New York: Routledge. Leyton,
M. 1992. Symmetry, Causality, Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. Littler, J. and Roshi, N. eds 2005. The Politics of
Heritage: The Legacies of “Race”. London: Routledge.
Lowenthal, D. 1985. The Past is a Foreign Country.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Malraux, A. 1948.
Imaginary Museum. The Burlington Magazine, 90 (542) (May
1948): 127–128. National Library of Australia. 2003.
Guidelines for the Preservation of Digital Heritage.
Internet. Available from http://www.nla.gov.au/ accessed 1
November 2005. Nietzsche, F. 1995. The Use and Abuse of
History. New York: Macmillan. Pearce, S.M. 1996. Objects as
meaning: or narrating the past. In Interpreting Objects and
Collections: A Cultural Study, ed. Susan Pearce. London:

Routledge, pp. 113–135. Peckham, R.S. ed. 2003. Rethinking
Heritage: Cultures and Politics in Europe. London: I.B.
Taurus. Rodriguez, C. 2004. The Renaissance of Citizens’
Media. In Media Development 2004/2 Citizenship, Identity,
Media. London: WACC. www.wacc.org.uk/wacc/
publications/media_development/2004_2 accessed 13.4.07.
Sontag, S. 1982. Barthes: Selected Writings. Oxford: The
University Press & Fontana/Collins. Trant, J. 2006a.
Exploring the potential for social tagging and folksonomy
in art museums: proof of concept. New Review of Hypermedia
and Multimedia, 12 (1 June 2006): 83–105. Trant, J. 2006b.
Curating Collections Knowledge: Museums in Cyberstructure.
In Museum Infomatics: People, Information and Technology in
Museums, ed. P.F. Marty and K. Jones. New York: Taylor and
Francis. UNESCO. 2003. UNESCO Charter on the Preservation
of Digital Heritage Internet. Available from
http://portal.unesco.org/ci/en/ev.phpURL_ID=8967&URL_DO=DO_
TOPIC& URL_ SECTION=201.html accessed 1 November 2005.
Webb, C. 2003. UNESCO Guidelines for the Preservation of
Digital Heritage: UNESCO. Williams, R. 1963. The Long
Revolution. Harmondsworth: Pelican.

12 EXPLORATIVE SHADOW REALMS OF UNCERTAIN
HISTORIES
Bartle, R.A. 2003. Designing Virtual Worlds, Indianapolis,
Indiana: New Riders.
Billinghurst, M. and Weghorst, S. 1995. The Use of Sketch
Maps to Measure Cognitive Maps of Virtual Environments. In
Proceedings of Virtual Reality Annual International
Symposium (VRAIS ’95), pp. 40–47.
Boellstroff, T. 2006. A Ludicrous Discipline? Ethnography
and Game Studies. Games and Culture 1: 29–35.
Bowman, D.A., Kruijff, E., Laviola, J., and Poupyrev, I.
2005. 3D User Interfaces: Theory and Practice. Boston:
Addison-Wesley.
Bowman, D., Kruijff, E., Laviola, J., and Poupyrev, I.
2001. An Introduction to 3D User Interface Design.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 10:
96–108.
Celetano, A., Noadari, M., and Pittarello, F. 2004.
Adaptive Interaction in Web3D Virtual Worlds. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on 3D Web
Technology, pp. 41–50.
Champion, E. 2004. Indiana Jones and the Joystick of Doom:
Understanding the Past via Computer Games. Trafﬁc, “A
Vision Splendid”, 5: 47–65.
Champion, E. 2005a. Place Space and Monkey Brains:
Cognitive Mapping in Games and Other Media. In DiGRA
(Digital Games Research Association), Changing Worlds:
Worlds in Play International Conference. Vancouver Canada.
Champion, E. 2005b. Interactive Emergent History as a
Cultural Turing Test. In The 6th International Symposium on
Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST
2005, 2, pp. 120–125.
Ciolﬁ, L. 2004. Situating “Place” in Interaction Design:
Enhancing the User Experience in Interactive Environments.
In an unpublished thesis, University of Limerick.
Darken, R.P. and Sibert, J. 1996. Wayﬁnding Strategies and
Behaviors in Large Virtual Worlds. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems:
Common Ground: pp. 142–149.

Dasgupta, S. ed. 2005. Encyclopedia of Virtual Communities
and Technologies. Hershey, Pennsylvania: Idea Group
Reference.
Dourish, P. 2001. Where the Action is: the Foundations of
Embodied Interaction. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Fencott, C. and Isdale, J. 2001. Design Issues for Virtual
Environments. In Proceedings of Workshop on Structured
Design of Virtual Environments at Web3D 2001.
Floyd, M. 2005. Drivers, Put Away Those Cell Phones: Study
Shows MultiTasking Comes with a Cost. In Oregon State
University News and Communication Services, online article.
Available from http://oregonstate.edu/dept/ncs/
newsarch/2005/Dec05/multitask.htm accessed 28 November
2006.
Foster, H. 1996. The Return of the Real: the Avant-garde at
the End of the Century. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press.
Frasca, G. 2003. Ludologists Love Stories, too: Notes from
a Debate that Never Took Place. In Level Up: Digital Games
Research Conference 2003, pp. 92–99. Gabbard, J.L., Hix,
D.A., and Swan, E.A.J. 1999. User-Centered Design and
Evaluation of Virtual Environments. IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, 19: 51–59. Gee, J.P. 2003. What Video
Games have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan. Gillings, M. 2002. Virtual
Realities and the Hyper-real. In D. J Unwin and P. Fisher
eds, Virtual Reality in Geography. London; New York: Taylor
& Francis. Gitelman, L. and Pingree, G.B. 2003. New Media,
1740–1915. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. Hämäläinen,
P., Ilmonen, T., Hoysniemi, J., Lindholm M., and Nykanen,
A. 2005. Martial Arts in Artiﬁcial Reality. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 781–790. Immersion Studios. 2005. Virtual
Canada. Internet. Available from http://www.
i-mmersion.com/sim_virtualcanada.shtml accessed 28 November
2006. Jacobson, J., Redfern, M.S., Furman, J.M., Whitney,
S.L., Sparto, P.J., Wilson, J.B., and Hodges, L.F. 2001.
Balance NAVE: A Virtual Reality Facility for Research and
Rehabilitation of Balance Disorders. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technolog,
pp. 103–109. Jang, S.H., Kim, Y., Hallett, M., Ahn, S.H.,
Kwon, Y., Kim J.H., and Lee, M.Y. 2005. Stroke Survivors
Play Virtual Reality Games, Win Increased Mobility. In
American Heart Association Rapid Access Journal Report,

2006. Internet. Available from
Okada, M., Tarumi, H., Yoshimura, T., and Moriya, K.
(2001). Distributed virtual environment realizing
collaborative environmental education. SIGCUE Outlook, 27
(3): 16–26.
Ondrejka, C. 2006. Finding Common Ground in New Worlds.
Games and Culture, 1(1): 111–115. Internet. Available from
http://gac.sagepub.com/cgi/content/ abstract/1/1/111
accessed 28 November 2006.
Prensky, M. 2001. Digital Game-based Learning. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Roussou, M. 2004. Learning by Doing and Learning through
Play: an Exploration of Interactivity in Virtual
Environments for Children. ACM Computers in Entertainment
(CIE), 2: 1–23.
Salen, K. and Zimmerman, E. 2003. Rules of Play: Game
Design Fundamentals. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Sartre, J. 1947. No Exit and the Flies, New York: Knopf.
Serviss, B. 2005. Escaping the World: High and Low
Resolution in Gaming. IEEE MultiMedia 12: 4–8.
Singer, E. 2003. Bat Echoes Used as Virtual Reality Guide.
In NewScientist.com News Service. Internet. Available from
http://www.newscientist.com/article.ns? id=dn4165 accessed
10:00 14 September 2003.
Skeates, R. 2000. Debating the Archaeological Heritage,
London: Duckworth.
Skidmore, J. 2003. Advanced Age Conﬁrmed for Pakal of
Palenque. In Mesoweb Reports and News. Internet. Available
from http://www.mesoweb.com/ reports/pakal.html accessed 28
November 2006.
Steinkuehler, C.A. 2006. Why Game (Culture) Studies Now?
Games and Culture, 1: 97–102.
Stewart, N. 2005. Extinct Native American Tribe Finds
Second Wind. In the Second Life Herald; accessed 28
November 2006.
Talbott, S.L. 1995. The Future Does Not Compute:
Transcending the Machines in Our Midst. Sebastopol,

California: O’Reilly & Associates.
Tuan, Y. 1998. Escapism, Baltimore: John Hopkins University
Press.
UNESCO. 1972. Deﬁnition of the Cultural and Natural
Heritage. In The General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization Meeting,
Paris,17 October to 21 November 1972, 17th session.
Internet. Available from
http://whc.unesco.org/en/conventiontext accessed 29 Nov
2006.
UNESCO. 2003 Text of the Convention for the Safeguarding of
Intangible Cultural Heritage. In The General Conference of
the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), Paris, 29 September to 17 October
2003, 32nd session, pp. 1–15. Internet. Available from
http://www.unesco.org/
culture/ich_convention/index.php?pg=00022 accessed 28
November 2006.
Wakanayashi, D. 2006. Sony CEO says move to HD will be
watershed. In Reuters. Internet. Available from
http://www.boston.com/business/technology/
Weckstrom, N. 2004. Finding “Reality” in Virtual
Environments. In an unpublished thesis, Arcada Polytechnic.
Westvang, E.E. 2004. Karakuri: Shadows Working on the
World. In VSMM 2004: Hybrid Realities, Digital Partners,
pp. 1106–1115.
Wikipedia, 2006. New media. Internet. Available from
http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/New_media accessed 29 Nov
2006, 04:00 GMT. Yee, N. 2006. The Labor of Fun: How Video
Games Blur the Boundaries of Work and Play. Games and
Culture, 1, 68–71. Zuk, T., Carpendale, S., and Glanzman,
W.D. 2005. Visualizing Temporal Uncertainty in 3D Virtual
Reconstructions. In The 6th International Symposium on
Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST
2005, 2, pp. 99–106.

13 MAKING A LIVABLE “PLACE”: Content
design in virtual environment
Bordwell, D and Thompson, K. 2001. Film art: An
Introduction. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Bruno, G. 2002. Atlas of Emotion: Journeys in Art,
Architecture, and Film. London: Verso Press.
Kalay, Y. and Marx, J. 2001. Architecture and the Internet:
Designing Places in Cyberspace. In Reinventing the
Discourse, ed. W. Jabi. ACADIA 2001: 230–240.
Novak, J. 2005. Game Development Essentials: An
Introduction. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Moreno, M. 2005. Screenwriting Basics. Internet. Available
from http://www. screenwriting.info accessed 15 September
2005.

14 THE COMPONENTS OF ENGAGEMENT IN
VIRTUAL HERITAGE ENVIRONMENTS
Alexaki, M. 2006. The Role of the Mediator in Virtual
Archaeology Experiences. Master of Arts thesis. University
of Athens Department of Museum Studies, Athens.
Barcelo, J.A. 2000. Visualizing what might be: An
Introduction to Virtual Reality techniques in Archaeology.
In Virtual Reality in Archaeology, eds J.A. Barcelo, F.
Maurizio and D.H. Sanders. Oxford: Archaeopress, pp. 9–35.
Bonami, F. 2005. The Authentic and the Universal. In
Universal Experience: Art, Life, and the Tourist’s Eye, eds
K. Dahlgren, K. Foreman and T.V. Eck. Chicago: Museum of
Contemporary Art Chicago and Distributed Art Publishers, p.
279.
Callieri, M., Paolo, C., Fabio, G., Gaetano, I., Claudio,
M., Paolo, P., Frederico, P., and Roberto, S., 2004.
Visualization and 3D Data Processing in the David
Restoration. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
March/ April, 16–21.
Carlsson, C. 1995. The Shape of Truth to Come: New Media
and Knowledge. In Resisting the Virtual Life: the Culture
and Politics of Information, eds J. Brook and I.A. Boal,
San Fransisco: City Lights, pp. 235–244.
Darley, A. 2000. Visual Digital Culture: Surface Play and
Spectacle in New Media Genres. London, New York: Routledge.
Durand, F. 2002. An Invitation to Discuss Computer
Depiction. In ACM/ Eurographics Symposium NPAR ‘02.
Frischer, B., Diane, F., Paolo, L., Sible, D.B., and Dean,
A. 2000. Virtual Reality and Ancient Rome: The UCLA
Cultural VR Lab’s Santa Maria Maggiore Project. In Virtual
Reality in Archaeology, eds J.A. Barcelo, F. Maurizio and
D.H. Sanders. Oxford: Archaeopress, pp. 155–162.
Gillings, M. 2000. Plans, Elevations and Virtual Worlds:
the Development of Techniques for the Routine Construction
of Hyperreal Simulations. In Virtual Reality in
Archaeology, ed. Franco Niccolucci. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Gooch, A. and Bruce, G. 2001. Non-Photorealistic Rendering.
Wellesley, MA: AK Peters. Gwilt, I. 2004. Interface as
Image: Image Making and Mixed Reality. ACM SIGGRAPH 2004
Art Essays. Los Angeles: ACM Press. Heilig, M.L. 1992. The

Cinema of the Future. PRESENCE: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 1 (3): 279–294. Hertz, P. 2005. VR as
Performance for an Audience. LEONARDO Electronic Almanac 13
(11). Huizinga, J. 1971. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play
Element in Culture. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. Kenderdine,
S. and Tim, H. This is not a Peep Show! The Virtual Room at
Melbourne Museum (VROOM): 1–21. Levy, R.M. 2001. Temple
Site at Phimai: Modeling for the Scholar and the Tourist.
In Seventh International Conference on Virtual Systems and
Multimedia (VSMM’01. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 147–159.
McLuhan, M. 1964. Understanding Media, The Extensions of
Man. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Morse, M. 1996. Nature
Morte: Landscape and Narrative in Virtual Environments. In
Immersed in Technology: Art and Virtual Environments, eds
Mary Anne Moser and Douglas MacLeod. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press, pp. 195–232. Murray, J.H. 1997. Hamlet on the
Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press. Naimark, M. 1990. Realness and
Interactivity. In The Art of Human Computer Interface
Design, ed. Brenda Laurel. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, pp.
455–459. Niccolucci, F. 1999. Virtual Reality in
Archaeology: An Useful Tool or a Dreadful Toy? In
Mediaterra. Athens, Greece: Fournos Center for Art and New
Technologies. Niccolucci, F. 2002. Virtual Archaeology: An
Introduction. In Virtual Archaeology: Proceedings of the
VAST 2000 Euroconference, ed. Franco Niccolucci. Arezzo,
Italy: Archaeopress Oxford, pp. 3–6. Pares, N. and Roc, P.
2001. Interaction-Driven Virtual Reality Application
Design. A Particular Case: El Ball del Fanalet or
Lightpools. PRESENCE: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 10 (2): 236–245. Pascoe, D. 1997. Peter
Greenaway: Museums and Moving Images. Essays in Art and
Culture. London: Reaktion Books. Robinett, W. 1992.
Synthetic experience: a proposed taxonomy. PRESENCE:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1 (2) Spring:
229–247. Roussou, M. 2002. Virtual Heritage: From the
Research Lab to the Broad Public. In Virtual Archaeology:
Proceedings of the VAST 2000 Euroconference, ed. Franco
Niccolucci. Arezzo, Italy: Archaeopress Oxford, pp. 93–100.
Roussou, M. 2004. Learning by Doing and Learning through
Play: an Exploration of Interactivity in Virtual
Environments for Children. ACM Computers in Entertainment
(CiE) 2 (1): Article 1. Roussou, M. and George, D. 2003.
Photorealism and Non-Photorealism in Virtual Heritage
Representation. In 4th International Symposium on Virtual
Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage
(VAST 2003) and 1st Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and
Cultural Heritage, eds A. Chalmers, D. Arnold and F.
Niccolucci. Brighton: Eurographics, pp. 47–56.

Roussou, M., Martin, O., and Mel, S. 2006. The Virtual
Playground: an Educational Virtual Reality Environment for
Evaluating Interactivity and Conceptual Learning. Journal
of Virtual Reality 10 (3–4): 227–240.
Ryan, M.-L. 2001. Narrative as Virtual Reality, eds S.G.
Nichols, G. Prince and W. Steiner. Baltimore and London:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Schell, J. 2003. Understanding entertainment: story and
gameplay are one. In The Human-Computer Interaction
Handbook, eds J.A. Jacko and A. Sears. Lawrence Erlbaum, Ch
43.
Schell, J. and Joe, S. 2001. Designing Interactive Theme
Park Rides. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
July–August: 11–13.
Serota, N. 1996. Experience or Interpretation: The Dilemma
of Museums of Modern Art. London: Thames & Hudson.
Sideris, A. and Maria, R. 2002. Making a New World Out of
an Old One: in Search of a Common Language for
Archaeological Immersive VR Representation. In 8th
International Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia
(VSMM). Gyeongju, Korea: VSMM, pp. 31–42.
Staley, D.J. 2003. Computers, Visualization, and History:
How New Technology Will Transform Our Understanding of the
Past. History, Humanities, and New Technologies. Armonk,
NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Sutherland, I. 1965. The Ultimate Display. International
Federation of Information Processing, IFIP, 2: 506–508.
Tzortzaki, D. 2001. Museums and Virtual Reality: Using the
CAVE to Simulate the Past. Digital Creativity 12 (4):
247–251.
Watson, B., Janet, K., Tim, M., Tom, M., Claudia, H.,
Louis, G., and Fransen, S. 2004. StorySpace: Technology
Supporting Reﬂection, Expression, and Discourse in
Classroom Narrative. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, March/ April: 13–15.
Weschler, L. 1995. Mr. Wilson’s Cabinet of Wonder: Pronged
Ants, Horned Humans, Mice on Toast, and Other Marvels of
Jurassic Technology. New York: Pantheon.

15 EDUCATIONAL TOOL OR EXPENSIVE TOY?
EVALUATING VR EVALUATION AND ITS
RELEVANCE FOR VIRTUAL HERITAGE
Adams, M. and Moussouri, T. 2002. The interactive
experience: Linking research and practice. In Proceedings
of Interactive Learning in Museums of Art, London, 17–18
May 2002. London: V&A Museum. Internet. Available from
http://www.vam.ac.uk/res_cons/research/learning/ accessed
16 October 2005. Alessi, S.M. 1988. Fidelity in the design
of instructional simulations. Journal of Computer-Based
Instruction 15: 40–47. Allison, D.K. and Gwaltney, T. 1991.
How People Use Electronic Interactives: “Information Age –
People, Information & Technology”. In ICHIM ‘91 (Conf.
Proceedings, Pittsburgh 14–16 October 1991), ed. D.
Bearman. Pittsburgh, PA: Archives and Museum Informatics,
pp. 62–73. Antonietti, A. and Cantoia, M. 2000. To see a
painting versus to walk in a painting: an experiment on
sense-making through virtual reality. Computers & Education
34 (3/4): 213–23. Baxter, J.H. and Preece, P.F.W. 1999.
Interactive multimedia and concrete threedimensional
modelling. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 15:
323–31. Belaën, F. 2003. L’immersion au service des musées
de sciences. In ICHIM 2003 (International Cultural Heritage
Informatics Meeting). Conf. Proceedings published on CD-ROM
only, Paris, École du Louvre, 8–12 September 2003. Archives
and Museum Informatics. Biosca, E., Cantarell, E., Sancho,
M., and Vinyoles, T. 2002. Reconstruyendo el pasado.
Enseñar con tecnologías de realidad virtual. Iber:
Didactica de las Ciencias Sociales, Geograﬁa e Historia
31(March): 103–111. Bricken, M. and Byrne, C.M. 1993.
Summer Students in Virtual Reality. A Pilot Study on
Education Applications of Virtual Reality Technology. In
Virtual Reality. Applications and Explorations, ed. Alan
Wexelblat. Boston: Academic Press Professional, pp.
199–217. Chan Lin, L. 2001. Formats and prior knowledge on
learning in a computer-based lesson. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 17: 409–19. Chiu, C.-H. 2002. The effects
of collaborative teamwork on secondary science. Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning 18: 262–71. Chou, S.-W. and Liu,
C.-H. 2005. Learning effectiveness in a web-based virtual
learning environment: a learner control perspective.
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 (1): 65–76. di
Blas, N., Gobbo, E., and Paolini, P. 2005a. 3D Worlds and
Cultural Heritage: Realism vs. Virtual Presence. In Museums
and the Web 2005, (Conf. Proceedings, Vancouver, Canada
19–22 March 2003) eds D. Bearman and J. Trant. Toronto:
Archives and Museum Informatics. Internet. Available from
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2005/papers/diBlas/diBlas.html
accessed 10 January 2006. Di Blas, N., Gobbo, E., Paolini,

P., and Poggi, C. 2005b. 3D Worlds for education:
cooperation and virtual presence. In Virtual reality at
Work in the 21st Century. Impact on society, ed. H.
Thwaites. Ghent, Belgium: International Society on Virtual
Systems and Multimedia, pp. 375–84. Doering, Z.D.,
Pawluklewicz, J.D., and Bohling, K. 1989. The Caribou
Connection: Will People Stop, Look, and Question?
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution. Economou, M. 1998.
The evaluation of museum multimedia applications: lessons
from research. Journal of Museum Management & Curatorship
17 (2): 173–87. Economou, M. 2004. Evaluation strategies in
the cultural sector: the case of the Kelvingrove Museum and
Art Gallery in Glasgow. Museum and Society 2(1) March 2004.
Internet. Available from http://www.le.ac.uk/ms/m&s/
m&sframeset.html accessed 10 October 2005.
Falk, J. and Lynn, D. 1992. The Museum Experience.
Washington, DC: Whalesback Books.
Galani, A. and Chalmers, M. 2003. Far away is close at
hand: Shared mixed reality museum experience for local and
remote museum companions. In ICHIM 2003 (International
Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting) Conf. Proceedings
published on CD-ROM only, Paris, École du Louvre, 8–12
September 2003. Archives and Museum Informatics. Internet.
Available from
http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/∼areti/Galani_ichim03.pdf accessed
25 October 2005.
Giusti, E. 1993a. ‘Global Warming: Understanding the
Forecast’ – An Assessment. American Museum of Natural
History evaluation report, October 1993.
Giusti, E. 1994b. ‘Hall of Human Biology & Evolution’:
Summative Evaluation, American Museum of Natural History
evaluation report, 3 March 1994.
Harper, B., Hedberg, J., Corderoy, R., and Wright, R. 2000.
Employing cognitive tools within interactive multimedia
applications. In Computers as cognitive tools: no more
walls, ed. S.P. Lajoie. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp.
227–46.
Heath, C. and vom Lehn, D. 2002. Misconstruing
interactivity. In Proceedings of Interactive Learning in
Museums of Art, London, 17–18 May 2002. London: V&A Museum.
Internet. Available from http://www.vam.ac.uk/
res_cons/research/learning/ accessed 16 October 2005.
Hedberg, J.G. and Alexander, S. 1994. Virtual reality in

Education: deﬁning researchable issues. Educational Media
International 31 (4): 214–223.
Hein, G.E. 1995. Evaluating teaching and learning in
museums. In Museum, Media, Message, ed. E.
Hooper-Greenhill. London: Routledge, pp. 189–203.
Hein, G.E. 1998. Learning in the Museum. London: Routledge.
Hilke, D.D., Hennings, E. and Springuel, M. 1988. The
Impact of Interactive Computer Software on Visitors’
Experiences: A Case Study. ILVS Review 1 (1): 34–49.
Hsi, S. 2003. A study of user experiences mediated by
nomadic web content in a museum. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 19: 308–79.
Huff, C. 1996. Gender, computer assisted learning and
anxiety: with a little help from a friend. Journal of
Educational Computing Research 15 (1): 65–69.
Jackson, R.L. and Fagan, E. 2000. Collaboration and
Learning within Immersive Virtual Reality. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Collaborative
Virtual Environments. Nova York: ACM Press, pp. 83–92.
Johnson, A., Roussos, M., Leigh, J., Vasilakis, C., Barnes,
C., and Moher, T. 1998. The NICE Project: learning together
in a virtual world. In Proceedings VRAIS’98, pp. 176–83.
Jovet, V. 2003. Le multimedia dans l’exposition: la double
problématique de l’appropriation et de l’intégration d’un
media marginal. In ICHIM 2003 (International Cultural
Heritage Informatics Meeting). Conf. Proceedings published
on CD-ROM only, Paris, École du Louvre, 8–12 September
2003. Archives and Museum Informatics.
Keene, S. 1998. Digital Collections: Museums and the
Information Age. Oxford, Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Lee, H., Park, S.-T., Kim, H.-S., and Lee, H. 2005.
Students’ understanding of astronomical concepts enhanced
by an immersive Virtual Reality system (IVRS). In 3rd
International Conference on Multimedia and Information and
Communication Technologies in Education. Caceres, Spain
7–10 June 2005. Recent Research Developments in Learning
Technologies. Internet. Available from
http://www.formatex.org/micte2005/313.pdf accessed 14
January 2006. Lévy, P. 1995. Qu’est ce que le virtuel?
Paris: La Découverte, coll. ‘Sciences et société’. McManus,

P.M. 1987. It’s the company you keep ... the social
determinants of learning-related behaviour in a science
museum. International Journal of Museum Management and
Curatorship 6: 263–70. McManus, P.M. 1988. Good companions
... more on the social determination of learning-related
behaviour in a science museum. International Journal of
Museum Management and Curatorship 7: 37–44. McManus, P.M.
1993a. A Study of Visitors’ Memories of Gallery 33. In
Gallery 33: A Visitor Study, ed. J. P. Jones. Birmingham:
Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery, pp. 56–73. McManus,
P.M. 1993b. A Survey of Visitors’ Reactions to the
Interactive Video Programme “Collectors in the South
Paciﬁc”. In Gallery 33: A Visitor Study, ed. J. P. Jones.
Birmingham: Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery, pp. 74–114.
McNamara, P. 1986. Computers Everywhere – but What Happened
to the Research? The Journal of Museum Education:
Roundtable Reports 11 (1): 21–24. Menninger, M. 1991. An
Evaluation Study of the Interactive Videodisc Program on
Illuminated Manuscripts. The J. Paul Getty Meuseum, May
1991. Mellor, V. 1993. The Micro Gallery: An evaluation of
the Hypertext system in the National Gallery. MSc thesis,
The City University, Department of Information Science.
Miles, R. 1993. Grasping the greased pig: evaluation of
educational exhibits. In Museum visitor studies in the 90s,
eds Sandra Bicknell and Graham Farmelo. London: Science
Museum, pp. 24–33. Morrissey, K. 1991. Visitor Behavior and
Interactive Video. Curator 34 (2): 109–18. Neuman, D. 1989.
Computer based education for learning disabled students;
teacher’s perceptions and behaviors. Journal of Special
Education Technology 9 (3): 156–66. Niccolucci, F. 2002.
Virtual Archaeology: An Introduction. In Virtual
Archaeology: Proc. of the VAST 2000 Euroconference, Arezzo,
Italy. November 2000, ed. F. Niccolucci. BAR International
Series 1075, Oxford: Archaeopress, pp. 24–25. Osberg, K.M.
1997. Constructivism in practice: the case for
meaning-making in the virtual world. PhD Dissertation.
University of Washington. Internet. Available from
Reid, D.J., Zhang, J., and Chen, Q. 2003. Supporting
scientiﬁc discovery learning in a simulation environment.
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 19 (1): 9–20.
Ronen, M. and Eliahu, M. 1999. Simulation as a home
learning environment students’ views. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 15 (4): 258–68.
Roussou, M. 2002. Virtual Heritage: From the Research Lab
to the Broad Public. In Virtual Archaeology. Proceedings of
the VAST 2000 Euroconference, Arezzo, Italy, 24–25 November
2000, ed. Franco Niccolucci. BAR International Series 1075,

Oxford: Archaeopress, pp. 93–100. Internet. Available from
Roussou, M. 2004. Learning by doing and learning through
play: An exploration of interactivity in virtual
environments for children. ACM Computers in Entertainment
2(1). Internet. Available from
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=973818 accessed 16
October 2005.
Roussou, M. and Drettakis, G. 2003. Photorealism and
Non-photorealism in Virtual Heritage Representation. In
Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural
Heritage (VAST 2003) and 1st Eurographics Workshop on
Graphics and Cultural Heritage, 5–7 November 2003.
Brighton, pp. 46–57. Internet. Available from
http://www.makebelieve.gr/mr/www/mr_publications.html
accessed 10 September 2005.
Scanlon, E., Tosunoglu, C., Jones, A., Butcher, P., Ross,
S., Greenberg, J., Taylor, J., and Murphy, P. 1998.
Learning with computers: experiences of evaluation.
Computers & Education 30 (1/2): 9–14.
Schroeder, R. 1996. Possible worlds: the social dynamic of
virtual reality technology. Boulder: Westview Press.
Scott, S.D., Mandryk, R.L., and Inkpen, K.M. 2003.
Understanding children’s collaborative interactions in
shared environments. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning
19 (2): 220–28.
Sharpe, E. 1983. Touch-Screen Computers – An Experimental
Orientation Device at the National Museum of American
History. Ofﬁce of Public and Academic Programs, National
Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
Shaw, G. and Marlow, N. 1999. The role of student learning
styles, gender, attitudes and perceptions on information
and communication technology assisted learning. Computers &
Education 33 (4): 223–34.
Sims, R. 1997. Interactivity: A forgotten art?
Instructional Technology Research Online. Internet.
Available from http://www2.gsu.edu/∼wwwitr/docs/interact/
accessed 16 May 2005.
Smith, J.K. 1990. Methods of Measuring Learning. In What
research says about learning in science museums, ed. B.
Serrell. Washington, DC: Association of Science-Technology
Centers, pp. 16–18.

Song, K.S. and Lee, W.Y. 2002. A virtual reality
application for geometry classes. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 18: 149–56.

16 DESIGNING A VIRTUAL MUSEUM OF
ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE
Allen, S. 1998. Terminal Velocities: The Computer in the
Design Studio. In The Virtual Dimension: Architecture,
Representation, and Crash Culture, ed. J. Beckmann. New
York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Alpers, S. 1991. The Museum as a Way of Seeing. In
Exhibiting Cultures: the Poetics and Politics of Museum
Display, eds S. Lavine, and T. Karp, Washington:
Smithsonian Institute Press.
Barthes, R. 1968. The Reality Effect. In The Rustle of
Language. New York: Hill and Wang.
Benjamin, W. 1973. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction. In Illuminations. New York: Schocken Books.
Bennett, T. 1995. The Birth of the Museum. London:
Routledge.
Butler, R. 1999. Jean Baudrillard: The Defence of the Real,
London: Sage.
Cameron, F. 2001. Wired Collections – the Next Generation.
International Journal of Museum Management and Curatorship,
19 (3): 309–15.
Dewdney, A. and Frank B. 1995. Television, Computers,
Technology and Cultural Form. In The Photographic Image in
Digital Culture, ed. M. Lister, New York: Routledge.
Fyfe, G. 2004. Reproductions, Cultural Capital and Museums:
Aspects of the culture of copies. Museum and Society, 2
(March): 47–67.
Gielen, P. 2004. Museumchronotopics: on the Representation
of the Past in Museums. Museum and Society, 2 (November):
147–60.
Greenhill, E.H. 1992. Museums and the Shaping of Knowledge.
New York: Routledge.
Karlholm, D. 2001. Reading the Virtual Museum of General
Art History, Art History, 24 (September): 552–77.
Karp, C. 2004. Digital Heritage in Digital Museums. Museum
International, 56 (1–2): 45–51.

Keene, S. 1998. Digital Collections: Museums and the
Information Age. Oxford, Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Lavine, S. and Karp, I. 1991. eds. Exhibiting Cultures: the
Poetics and Politics of Museum Display. Washington:
Smithsonian Institute Press. Mitchell, W.J. 1998.
Antitectonics: The Poetics of Virtuality. In The Virtual
Dimension: Architecture, Representation, and Crash Culture,
ed. J. Beckmann. New York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Paroissien, L. 2002. Modelling a Museum for the 21st
Century. In Tangled Destinies, ed. D. Reed. Canberra:
National Museum of Australia. Pearce, S. 1999. A New Way of
Looking at Old Things. Museum International, 51 (2): 12–17.
Preziosi, D. 1995. Museology and Museography. The Art
Bulletin, New York, 77 (March): 13–16. Sherman, D. 1994.
Quatremere/Benjamin/Marx: Art Museums, Aura, and Commodity
Fetishism. In Museum Culture: Histories, Discourses and
Spectacles, eds I. Rogoff and D. Sherman. New York:
Routledge. Stafford, B. 1997. Good Looking: Essays on
Virtual Images. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Sudjic, D. 2002.
A nuanced response. In Tangled Destinies, ed. D. Reed.
Canberra: National Museum of Australia. The West
Australian. 1884. 30 October: 4.

17 PLACE-HAMPI: Co-evolutionary narrative
and augmented stereographic panoramas,
Vijayanagara, India
Gerhard, M., David, M., and Dave, J.H. 2004. Embodiment and
Co-presence in Collaborative Interfaces. International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, 61 (4): 453–80. Elsevier
Academic Press.
Gerhard, M. David, M., and Dave J.H. 2005. Close Encounters
of the Virtual Kind: Agents Simulating Co-presence. Applied
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 19 (3–4): 393–412. Philadelphia:
Taylor and Francis.
iCinema Centre for Interactive Cinema. Internet. Available
from http://www. icinema.unsw.edu.au accessed 1 Nov 2005.
Kenderdine, S. 2004. Stereographic Panoramas of Angkor,
Cambodia. Virtual System and Multimedia, International
Society for Virtual Systems and Multimedia. Gifu, Japan.
VSMM, pp. 612–21.
Kenderdine, S. 2005 Speaking in Rama: Panoramic Vision in
Cultural Heritage Visualization. In Theorizing Digital
Cultural Heritage: A Critical Discourse, eds F. Cameron and
S. Kenderdine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Milekic, S. 2002. Towards Tangible Virtualties:
Tangialities. In Proceedings of Museums and the Web 2002,
eds D. Bearman and J. Trant. Pittsburgh: Archives and
Museum Informatics.
Papagiannakis, G., Schertenleib, S., Ponder, M., Arévalo,
M., Magnenat-Thalmann, N., and Thalmann, D. 2004. Real Time
Virtual Humans in AR Sites. In Proceedings of the IEE
Visual Media Production (CVMP).15–16 March 2004. London,
pp. 273–76.
Phillips, D. 1997. Exhibiting Authenticity. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Roussou, M. and George, D. 2003. Photorealism and
Non-Photorealism in Virtual Heritage Representation. In
First Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and Cultural
Heritage, eds A. Chalmers, D. Arnold and F. Niccolucci. The
Eurographics Association. CD-ROM.
Shapiro, S., Maurice, P., Yves, L., and Hector, J.L. 2000.
Iterated Belief Change in the Situation Calculus. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on

Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. San Francisco:
Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 527–38.
Sturken, M.
as Cultural
the Presen,
New England

1999. Narratives of Recovery: Repressed Memory
Memory. In Acts of Memory: Cultural Recall in
eds M. Bal and J. Crewe. Hanover: University of
Press, pp. 231–48.

Urry, J. 2001. The Tourist Gaze. 2nd edn. London, Thousand
Oaks, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
Virtual Room. Internet. Available from
http://www.vroom.org.au accessed 1 Nov 2005.
Weikop J., Stenholt, R., Laursen, R., and Granum, E. 2005.
Creating a Virtual Image Based Window using Rendering. In
Proceedings of 8th Annual International Workshop on
Presence, September 2005. London.
Witcomb, A. 2004. Re-Imagining Museums: Beyond the
Mausoleum, London: Routledge.

18 DIGITAL SONGLINES: Digitising the
arts, culture and heritage landscape of
aboriginal Australia
Department of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Policy
(DATSIP). 1998. Protocols for Consultation with Aboriginal
People. Australia: Australian Government.
Elkin, A.P. 1953. The Australian Aborigines. Australia:
Australian Government.
Flood, J. 1997. Rock Art of the Dreamtime: Images of
Ancient Australia. Sydney: Angus & Robertson.
Gutierrez, D., and Francisco, S. 2004. Archaeological and
Cultural Heritage: Bringing Life to an Unearthed Muslim
Suburb in an Immersive Environment. Journal of Cultural
Heritage, 5 (1): 63–74.
Henderson, J. 1997. Culture and Heritage: Indigenous
Languages. Australia: Australian Government.
Ibanez, J., and Rocio, R.-R. 2003. Storytelling in Virtual
Environments from a Virtual Guide Perspective. Virtual
Reality – Research Development and Applications 7 (1): 30.
Kim, Y., and Thenkurussi, K. 2001. Real-time Animation of
King Ashur-nasir-pal II (883–859 BC) in the Virtual
Recreated Northwest Palace. In Virtual Systems and
Multimedia, pp. 128–32.
Langloh-Parker, C. 1953. Australian Legendary Tales.
Australia: Angus and Robertson.
Lutz, B., and Michael, W. 1999. Virtual Dunhuang Art Cave:
A Cave within a CAVE. Internet. Available from
http://www.eg.org/EG/CGF/Volume18/ Issue3/cgf346.html
accessed December 2004.
Marini, D., and Maurizio, R. 1997. Virtual Reality and Web
Tools to Convey the Visual Information of Ancient
Monuments. Internet. Available from
Meehan, B. 1995. Aboriginal Views on the Management of Rock
Arts Sites in Australia. Australia: Australian Government.
Mellor, D., and Terri, J. 2001. Valuing Art, Respecting
Culture: Protocols for Working with the Australian
Indigenous Visual Arts and Craft Sector. Australia:
Australian Government.

Memmott, P. 1991. Humpy, House and Tin Shed: Aboriginal
Settlement History on the Darling River. Australia:
Australian Government.
Museums Australia. 1998. Taking the Time: Museums,
Galleries, Cultural Protocols and Communities. Australia:
Australian Government.
National Association for the Visual Arts (NAVA). 1998.
Valuing Art, Respect Culture – Protocols for Working with
the Australian Indigenous Visual Arts and Craft Sector.
Australia: Australian Government.
Ridgeway, A. 1984. Aboriginal Sites and Involvement of
Aborigines in Management and Interpretation. Australia:
Australian Government.
Rose, D.B. 1996. Nourishing Terrains: Australian Aboriginal
Views of Landscape and Wilderness. Canberra, Australian
Heritage Commission.
Sanders, D. 2001. Persuade or Perish: Moving Virtual
Heritage beyond Pretty Pictures of The Past. In Virtual
Systems and Multimedia, pp. 236–40.

CONCLUSION: A future for the past
Addison, A.C. 2007. The vanishing virtual. In New Heritage:
new media and cultural heritage, eds Y.E Kalay, T. Kvan,
and J. Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge.
Afﬂeck, J. and Thomas, K. 2007. Memory capsules: discursive
interpretation of cultural heritage through new media. In
New Heritage: new media and cultural heritage, eds E.K.
Yehuda, T. Kvan, and J. Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge.
AlSayyad, N. 2007. Consuming heritage or the end of
tradition: the new challenges of globalization. In New
Heritage: new media and cultural heritage, eds Y.E Kalay,
T. Kvan, and J. Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge.
Benjamin, W. 1973. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction. In Illuminations. London: Fontana.
Bouchenaki, M. 2004. Editorial. Museum International: Views
and Visions of the Intangible 56 (221–222): 6–10.
Cameron, F. 2007. The politics of heritage authorship: The
Case of Digital Heritage Collections. In New Heritage: new
media and cultural heritage, eds Y.E Kalay, T. Kvan, and J.
Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge.
Chen, X. and Yehuda, E.K. 2007. Making a livable “place”:
content design in virtual environment. In New Heritage: new
media and cultural heritage, eds Y.E. Kalay, T. Kvan, and
J. Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge. Corsane, G. 2005. Issues
in heritage, museums and galleries. In Heritage, museums
and galleries: an introductory reader, ed. G. Corsane.
Oxon: Routledge, pp. 1–14. Dave, B. 2007. Virtual heritage:
mediating space, time and perspectives. In New Heritage:
new media and cultural heritage, eds Y.E. Kalay, T. Kvan,
and J. Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge. The Economist. 2006.
Living a Second Life. The Economist, 28 September.
Internet. Available from
Malpas, J. 2007. Cultural heritage in the age of new media.
In New Heritage: new media and cultural heritage, eds Y.E.
Kalay, T. Kvan, and J. Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge.
Postman, N. 1993. Technopoly: the surrender of culture to
technology. New York: Vintage Books.
Reuters, A. 2006. US Congress launches probe into virtual
economies. Reuters, 15 October. Internet. Available from
http://secondlife.reuters.com/stories/

Roussou, M. 2007. The components of engagement in virtual
heritage environments. In New Heritage: new media and
cultural heritage, eds Y.E. Kalay, T. Kvan, and J. Afﬂeck:
this volume: Routledge.
Silberman, N. 2007. Chasing the unicorn? The quest for
“essence” in digital heritage. In New Heritage: new media
and cultural heritage, eds Y.E. Kalay, T. Kvan, and J.
Afﬂeck: this volume: Routledge.
UNESCO. 2003a. Charter on the Preservation of the Digital
Heritage. In 32nd Session: The General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO. 2003b. Convention for the Safeguarding of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage. In 32nd Session: The General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization. Paris: UNESCO, pp. 1–15.
Winner, L. 1986. The Whale and the Reactor: a search for
limits in an age of high technology. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

