Nuclear Energy in Russia: From Future Technology to Cultural Heritage*
Dr Eglė Rindzevičiūtė
Dr Eglė Rindzevičiūtė is a Lecturer in Sociology at Kingston University London. Her research interests revolve
around the sociology of culture, particularly cultural policy, heritage and creative industries, and the sociology
of knowledge.
* This is a pre-print version of the essay which is published in the journal of British-Lithuanian Society Tiltas
(Autumn 2016)

Nuclear energy is not just a utility technology, it is also a resource for political and cultural power. In
this article I discuss the changes of the political and societal meanings of nuclear energy in Soviet and
post-Soviet Russia, as nuclear power left the laboratories, plants and factories and entered a very
different symbolic space: the museum. While Lithuanian political and industrial elites have been
debating the nuclear future for more than three decades, particularly in 2012 when the Ignalina
nuclear power station was decommissioned, these discussions need be set in a wider context. It is
imperative to understand the development of Soviet and Russian narratives of nuclear power, because
Lithuanian society still needs to learn how to cope with their Soviet nuclear legacy. Heritage and
cultural memory scholars are acutely aware that the past is often invoked and retrospectively
constructed in order to shape the future. Accordingly, I posit that the creation of Russian museums of
nuclear energy can be understood as a way of forging a particular path to the future.
The value of nuclear energy is far from being self-evident. Worldwide, nuclear energy, once seen as a
universal symbol of techno-scientific progress, has been systematically questioned since 1980, when
West German environmental movements demanded energiewende, the decommissioning of the
nuclear power industry.1 While Germany decided to decommission its nuclear energy sector, many
representatives of the nuclear industry still argue that nuclear power is a green technology that reduces
the human impact on climate change. However, there are many other issues associated with nuclear
technology, such as rising economic costs of nuclear energy production, labour exploitation in the
African uranium mines, social and environmental uncertainty surrounding communities that live close
to existing nuclear plants, disposal of nuclear waste, and last, but not the least, a particular security
apparatus that is required to ensure the security of nuclear power plants.2 Finally, the world nuclear
infrastructure is approaching the end of its lifecycle: during recent years, about 100 of the world’s 540
commercial nuclear reactors have been shut down.
The nuclear energy sector has been historically linked with nationalist sentiments: the identity of a
nuclear nation, modern and future oriented, played an important role in the US and France,3 but it was
in the Soviet Union that it acquired a particularly prominent political and social significance.4 After
World War II the Soviet Union emerged as a nuclear power, having built its first reactor in 1946,
tested their nuclear bomb RDS-1 on 29th August 1949, and launched the world’s first commercial
nuclear power station in Obninsk - the secret science city not far from Moscow - in 1954. Soviet
scientists participated in both nuclear power competition and anti-nuclear movements, having joined
1

Stefan Cihan Aykut, “Energy Futures from the Social Market Economy to the energiewende: The
Politicization of West German Energy Debates, 1950-1990,” in A Struggle for the Long Term in Transnational
Politics and Science: Forging the Future, eds. Jenny Andersson and Egle Rindzeviciute (London and New
York: Routledge, 2015), 63-91.
2
Gabrielle Hecht, Being Nuclear: Africans and the Global Uranium Trade (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
2012); Sonja Schmid, Producing Power: The Pre-Chernobyl History of the Soviet Nuclear Industry
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2015); Paul Josephson, Red Atom: Russia’s Nuclear Power Program from
Stalin to Today (Pittsburgh: The University of Pittsburgh Press, 2005).
3
Gabrielle Hecht, The Radiance of France: Nuclear Power and National Identity after World War II
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2009); Kate Brown, Plutopia: Nuclear Families in Atomic Cities and the
Great Soviet and American Plutonium Disasters (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
4
David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956 (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1994).

1

the international community of atomic scientists in the struggle to reduce nuclear arms in the 1960s.
When in 1986 the core of Chernobyl’s RBMK reactor melted, the Soviet nuclear industry found itself
at the centre of public attention; indeed, experience of large technological accidents enabled Soviet
citizens to express their criticism of the Communist Party government.5 After the break up of the
Soviet Union, its nuclear industry struggled to survive in the rubble of the post-Soviet economy.6
Things changed in 2005, when the reform of the Federal Agency for Atomic Energy (Minatom, earlier
called Minsredmash, from 2007 – Rosatom) began under its new leader Sergei Kirienko who declared
a Nuclear Renaissance. In October 2016 Kirienko was appointed as Vladimir Putin’s strategy advisor;
once again Russia’s future is defined by its government as a nuclear future.
A quick glance at the Russian nuclear industry today reveals an intense cultural strategy pursued by
Rosatom. During recent decades the corporate archive and museum became necessary attributes of a
mature, established business, both in Western countries and Russia: the history and material heritage
of nuclear energy is used as medium of internal and external communication.7 Minatom organised the
first exhibition celebrating 50 years of the nuclear branch at the Polytechnic Museum (Politekh) in
Moscow, in 1995.8 Rosatom’s 70th anniversary was marked with a large exhibition “70 Years of the
Nuclear Branch: A Chain Reaction of Success”, which opened in September 2015 at the Manege
exhibition hall, located in the very heart of Moscow, just next to the Kremlin. At 5 am - before the
busy Moscow traffic hit the streets - a crane carefully lowered a real-size, 2.5 ton model of AN602, a
thermonuclear bomb, whose test yielded 100Mgt in 1961 thus making it the world’s biggest test
explosion, into the Manege building. The exhibition suggested the dawn of the Russian nuclear
heritage, where the controversial past began to spill over into an uncertain future. The exhibition
contained objects collected from the many research institutes, design bureaus, factories and plants, all
of which make up the 270,000-strong corporate empire of Rosatom. Furthermore, not only
technological artefacts were displayed, but the whole era when Russia appeared to be a world-leading
technological power was nostalgically reconstructed: visitors could sit on 1950s’ benches which were
borrowed from Mosfilm. The entrance to the exhibition was painted a gloomy grey, with lowered
ceilings aiming to recreate the claustrophobic atmosphere of the secret Soviet nuclear programme
during postwar and early Cold War. While students from the National Research Nuclear University
(MIFI) acted as guides, long lines of visitors stretched outside the exhibition hall (over 100,000
visitors are thought to have visited the exhibition), suggesting a lively societal interest in nuclear
history. While this exhibition was temporary, Rosatom is currently planning to build a new museum
of nuclear energy on the site of the Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy (VdNKh) in
Moscow. An architectural competition for a new pavilion was announced in 2014; the winning
design, announced in 2015, envisioned a minimalist clean, white, open space, surrounded by mature
trees and green lawns, inviting people for a picnic.9 Rosatom’s message is clear: the nuclear past and
future are linked with democratic values, with openness and access, and are also environmentally
friendly.
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to consider the nuclear heritage as a mere corporate public relations
campaign. In what follows, I outline the history of the institutionalization of nuclear energy as a
5

Jane Dawson, Eco-Nationalism: Anti-Nuclear Activism and National Identity in Russia, Lithuania, and
Ukraine (Durham, NC: Duke U Press, 1996); Tania Kasperski, The Politics of Memory of a Nuclear Disaster:
The Political Uses of the Chernobyl Accident in Belarus, 1986-2008 (Doctoral Diss., Paris: IEP, 2012).
6
Kristina Šliavaite, From Pioneers to Target Group: Social Change, Ethnicity and Memory in a Lithuanian
Nuclear Power Plant Community (Lund: Lunds universitet, 2005).
7
The 2nd International Conference Corporate Museums Today on the 70 th Anniversary of the Nuclear Industry.
Collection of Conference Reports (Moscow: Boslen, 2015).
8
Olga Tarkhova, “The Representation of the Russian Nuclear Industry in the Collection of the Polytechnic
Museum,” The 2nd International Conference Corporate Museums Today on the 70 th Anniversary of the Nuclear
Industry. Collection of Conference Reports (Moscow: Boslen, 2015), 107-109.
9
The architect company LLC Unk Project. Irina Kireyeva, “Presentation of the International Competition to
Develop the Architectural Concept of the Atomic Energy Pavilion at the Exhibition of National Economy
Achievements,” The 2nd International Conference Corporate Museums Today on the 70 th Anniversary of the
Nuclear Industry. Collection of Conference Reports (Moscow: Boslen, 2015), 61-65.

2

cultural heritage in Russia. In doing so, I propose that its nuclear culture heritage plays a complex role
in Russian society that cannot be reduced to top-down state ideology or corporate branding.

Nuclear power enters the Politekh
The Politekh’s origins are similar to that of many Western museums of science and technology. It was
founded by the Tsar Aleksandr II, who sought to improve both technical engineering and design
competence in Russia after the all-Russian industrial fair of 1870. The extraordinarily ornate building
was funded by an association of different industrialists. Just off the picturesque Moika Street, the
Politekh stretches along a square and, from the interwar period, was home to many small businesses
as well as the growing collection of relicts of Russian science and technology. After World War II, the
museum was a shambles, struggling to reconstitute its staff and exhibitions. The museum was
transferred from the People’s Commissariat of Enlightenment (Narkompros) to Znanie, the
association for the promotion of knowledge and enlightenment. While Znanie also ran VdNKH
expositions of nuclear energy, which were opened in 1956 and 1959 and were was targeted at the
professionals,10 the Politekh specialised in promoting science and technology to children and students,
thus being a vehicle of Soviet social modernisation. These two institutions competed with each other:
the Politekh had to constantly defend its relevance to the nuclear industry and wider society.
Archival documents reveal that the first permanent exposition dedicated to nuclear energy was
planned in 1947, when an engineer, Mikhail Ivanov, was commissioned to develop a thematic plan.11
The first exposition focused on the structure of atomic and nuclear physics; in the first permanent
exposition which opened in the early 1960s the master narrative of binding nuclear energy with Soviet
progress was firmly established. Nuclear power was presented in two sections, theoretical nuclear
physics and civil applications of nuclear power and radioactive isotopes. Visitors could examine
models of reactors, of Obninsk, Voronezh and Beloiarsk nuclear power stations, and different devices.
The nuclear energy hall was also decorated with a large picture depicting a muscular and heroic
Prometheus, the conqueror of the most powerful forces of the universe. Nuclear energy, in this way,
was constructed as a peaceful, progressive technology securing prosperity for the Soviet people.12
Although the exhibition introduced a thermonuclear reaction, in the 1960s-1980s the military
applications of nuclear power were not included in the Politekh’s exhibitions.13
While there were several serious nuclear accidents in the Soviet Union before the Chernobyl disaster,
it was from 1986 that the risks associated with “peaceful” nuclear energy became publicly known and
radically transformed the social context of the museum expositions. Nuclear industry could hardly
symbolise human mastery over nature and rational control of Soviet society anymore. The Politekh
itself struggled, as did all museums in Russia, to survive during economic hardship; VDNKh
pavilions crumbled and the utopian narratives of technological progress were replaced with a
balancing act of coping with uncertainty in the newly introduced market economy.14
It was in 1992 when the first museum of nuclear weapons was opened in the Russian federal nuclear
centre known as “Arzamas 16”.15 In 1995 a large exhibition and series of public events were
organised at the Politekh to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Russian nuclear branch. Breaking
away from the shield of secrecy was the official goal of the exhibition’s organisers, and for the first
time nuclear weapons, models of a-bombs RDS-01 and RDS-04, were included in the museum’s
narrative of nuclear progress. A publication accompanying the exhibition detailed the human costs of
10

Sonja Schmid, “Celebrating Tomorrow Today: The Peaceful Atom on Display in the Soviet Union,” Social
Studies of Science, 36, no.3 (2006): 331-365.
11
The archives of the Politekhnicheskii Muzei, f.100, op. 34, KP 32824/6.
12
Ivan Martynenko,Politekhnicheskii muzei: Soderzhanie i printsipy postroeniia ekspozitsii (Moscow: Znanie,
1962)
13
Petr Guzman, Po zalam Politekhnicheskogo muzeia (Moscow: Znanie, 1967), 18.
14
See Schmid, “Celebrating Tomorrow Today”.
15
I. S. Drovenikov, “V muzee iadernogo oruzhiia,” Voprosy istorii estestvoznaniia i tekhniki, 4 (1994), 107-110.

3

nuclear progress, paying homage to Russian nuclear pioneers who had died in their thirties as a result
of exposure to plutonium.16 At that time, it seemed, a window of opportunity to address the
complexity of the nuclear heritage was opened.
Nuclear power becomes Russian cultural heritage
Until the 1990s the Politekh’s museum nuclear energy expositions were principally focused on
nuclear being an opening to the future, presenting the foundational achievements of the industry in the
1950s-1960s. But from the late 1990s it began to acquire a patina of techno-scientific heritage. In
2002 the Obninsk nuclear power station was decommissioned; the renewal of civil and military
arsenals of nuclear power made former secrets redundant and they could now enter the public sphere.
Moreover, the nuclear industry acquired its social past: an entire generation of nuclear physicists and
engineers was retiring. This professional nuclear community wanted to secure its place in history by
making sure that their stories, and also material culture, were preserved and made available to the
public. This was reinforced by a corporate interest to invest in the nuclear heritage as a means of
fostering loyalty among existing employees. Nuclear energy suddenly acquired a social, cultural and
material history.
Heritage scholars emphasise the importance of communities in defining and managing forms of
cultural heritage. This insight is very important if we want to understand nuclear heritage processes in
contemporary Russia. To be sure, the centralist, state-driven strategy to promote the nuclear industry
is an important factor and a source of funding and organizational resource for the development of a
nuclear heritage. However, the role of museum professionals and communities of nuclear industry
workers should not be underestimated. Indeed, the current museum expositions reveal that these two
processes - top-down and bottom-up - intertwine.
In 2012 the Politekh finalised a new permanent exposition entitled “Russia Makes It Herself”,
dedicated to achievements of Russian science. An important part of this exposition is dedicated to
nuclear energy. While Rosatom funded some of this work, a young generation of museum curators
designed and scripted the exhibition (as the Politekh closed for renovation in 2013, part of the nuclear
energy exposition can be viewed at VDNKh, at pavilion No. 26). The exposition presents nuclear
energy as a central component in the history of Russian science and technology: indeed, the
exposition title’s acronym, RDS, is also the name of the first a-bomb, the model of which the museum
received as a present from Sarov, where nuclear weapons are produced. The bomb occupies the centre
of the hall. This model is interactive: there is a platform from which a visitor is encouraged to
experience a nuclear explosion. This simulation appeals to all senses: the lights dim, sirens howl, the
ground trembles, the lights flash, and a fan produces the effect of the following blast. This experience
appears to be hugely popular with children, who excitedly demand to get “exploded” time and again.
While the bomb is located at the physical and semantic centre of the display, it is surrounded with
exhibits detailing different aspects of nuclear science, some of which revise the Soviet narrative of
nuclear progress. The nuclear defence section displays include a control panel, a working model
donated by Rosatom, that is produced after the Semipalatinsk, where a visitor can launch a virtual
bomb explosion. There is a screen on the panel which shows a black and white film of the actual test
explosion. Militarism is counterbalanced with displays documenting both the surreal conditions of
Beriia’s sharashki, prison camps for scientists where Soviet a-bomb was constructed, and the story of
Sadako Sesi, a Japanese girl from Hiroshima who died of radiation. Atoms-for-peace is illustrated
with mock-ups of reactors, a model of the Obninsk nuclear power plant, and a promotional cartoon for
children in which Rosatom paints a cheerful, green landscape with a nuclear power station providing
Russian children with a good life.

16

Although judging from the report of the accompanying conference, Chernobyl was not extensively discussed
on this occasion. I.S. Drovenikov, “Iadernyi iubilei v Moskve,” Voprosy istorii estestvoznaniia i tekhniki, 4
(1995), 3-17.

4

There is a clear gap in the exposition: the presentation of nuclear defence history does not go beyond
the 1950s-60s; the risks associated with nuclear energy is not represented: a visitor does not learn
much either about Chernobyl or uranium mines. Surprisingly, the world-famous Russian contribution
to computer simulation of the environmental effects of nuclear war which predicted that nuclear war
would cause climate change and lead to a nuclear winter is not included either.17 However, this
display reveals much more than earlier Soviet displays of nuclear industry did. Firstly, visitors can
encounter the materiality of Soviet nuclear weapons and can even manipulate some of them. Second,
documentary film footage accompanied by nuclear pioneers’ narratives tell the complex experience of
building the nuclear bomb, while at the same time using Gulag prisoners’ labour to run everyday life.
The future is presented as a green, nuclear future where plasma energy presents challenges and
opportunities and where international cooperation, regardless of the coded message of RDS – that
Russia can do it on its own – is the key to techno-scientific progress.
Nuclear power: corporate or national heritage?
Although the Politekh was granted the status of a leading museum in 1988 and that of a federal
agency in 1992, its governmental funding, just like of the entire Russian museum and heritage sector,
is limited and has been drastically reduced during the last couple of years. The role of Rosatom is
therefore very important for this museum, because the corporation can and does support the museum
by donating objects and co-financing ambitious projects. In 2013 Rosatom founded a separate unit,
the Historical and Cultural Centre of Rosatom, tasked with integrating the many existing museums
and emerging industrial heritage, like the Lenin nuclear icebreaker in Murmansk and nuclear science
cities of Obninsk and Sarov, across the whole nuclear branch.
What are the reasons that motivate this nuclear giant to engage with the heritage sector? I mentioned
earlier that museum activities have become a part of global corporate culture. In interviews, Rosatom
representatives told me that they see the heritage programme as an important instrument to integrate
their professional staff by building and sustaining their sense of community, loyalty and belonging.
The funding of the Politekh, publication of impressive historical overviews, establishment of a
museum in Obninsk are all such efforts to maintain the nuclear industry as a social and historical
community. In addition to these sites, there are many internal museums at nuclear branch institutions,
which are not accessible to the public. These museums, such as the museum of the V.G. Khlopin
Radium Institute in Saint Petersburg, are maintained as material and symbolic centres of the local
nuclear scientists’ and engineers’ communities, deposits of institutional identity.
Secrecy plays an important part in the lives of these internal nuclear branch museums. While
museums with closed access contain authentic, often quite radioactive objects, public museums, such
as the Politekh, mainly display mock-ups of nuclear equipment. The high degree secrecy of the Soviet
and post-Soviet nuclear industry is notorious, it reflects poorly in public opinion, as surveys reveal
that the Russians do not trust their nuclear industry. Over decades the Norwegian-Russian
environmental NGO Bellona has been lobbying Rosatom to adopt more transparent policies; I was
told that a significant change took place under Kirienko’s leadership: the first public information
centre was opened in Tomsk, in 2008. In 2010 the first exposition of declassified nuclear weapons
(models) was opened in the Factory of Machine Construction (PSZ).18 It is quite likely that Rosatom’s
ambition to construct nuclear energy as cultural heritage is part of the ongoing, albeit slow, opening
up of the nuclear industry to society.
Rosatom is serious about nuclear heritage: one should not underestimate the importance of the link
between science and technology and Russian national identity and pride. Scholars detailed that despite
Putin’s investment in R&D, Russia still lags far behind in terms of innovation and productivity.19 The
loss of the Soviet satellite states and the USSR’s great power status had a traumatising effect on the
17

Egle Rindzeviciute, The Power of Systems: How Policy Sciences Opened Up the Cold War World (Ithaca, IL:
Cornell University Press, 2016).
18
A. Kuznetsov, ed., Atomnyi vek: khronika i fotografii (Moscow: Rosatom, 2015), 334, 354.
19
Loren Graham, Lonely Ideas: Can Russia Compete? (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2013).

5

many living in the Russian space, as documented by Svetlana Aleksievich in her masterpiece The
Second Hand Time (2016). In this context, the history and heritage of the nuclear industry can offer a
resource for solidarity, a feeling of historical unity. Shared stories, objects, buildings, and sites are
used by heritage professionals to assemble a narrative of Russia’s technical and creative parity, if not
superiority, in the contemporary world.
Nuclear heritage thus conceived has little space for critical narratives of the damage that nuclear
industries inflicted on the Russian people, through inhuman treatment of nuclear branch workers,
disasters and contamination. While Chernobyl is acknowledged in the anniversary publications of
Rosatom (2007, 2015), this major accident is only hinted at in the Politekh exposition. Nor does such
heritage complex provide room for articulating and discussing future concerns regarding the
unresolved issue of safe deposition of nuclear waste. However, it is quite likely that the
professionalisation of the nuclear cultural heritage complex in Russia will bring new forms of
engagement with its nuclear past and the present, as nuclear science offers a particularly sharp lens to
understand the paths of the 20th century’s modernity.

6

