sustainability
Article

On How Technology-Powered Storytelling Can
Contribute to Cultural Heritage Sustainability
across Multiple Venues—Evidence from the
CrossCult H2020 Project
Kalliopi Kontiza 1, *,† , Angeliki Antoniou 2 , Abdullah Daif 3 , Susana Reboreda-Morillo 4 ,
Maddalena Bassani 5,‡ , Silvia González-Soutelo 4,§ , Ioanna Lykourentzou 6 ,
Catherine Emma Jones 7 , Joseph Padfield 8 and Martín López-Nores 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

*
†
‡
§

Former CrossCult Fellow, Research Department, The National Gallery, London WC2N 5DN, UK
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications, University of the Peloponnese, 22100 Tripoli, Greece;
angelant@uop.gr
AtlantTIC Research Center, Department of Telematics Engineering, University of Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain;
adrady@det.uvigo.es (A.D.); mlnores@det.uvigo.es (M.L.-N.)
Group of Studies in Archaeology, Antiquity and Territory, University of Vigo, 32004 Ourense, Spain;
rmorillo@uvigo.es (S.R.-M.); silvia.gonzalezs@uam.es (S.G.-S.)
Dipartamento dei Beni Culturali, Università Degli Studi di Padova, 35122 Padova, Italy;
maddalena.bassani@unipd.it
Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University,
3584 CC Utrecht, The Netherlands; i.lykourentzou@uu.nl
Faculty of Language and Literature, Humanities, Arts and Education, University of Luxembourg,
L-4365 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; catherine.jones@uni.lu
Research Department, The National Gallery, London WC2N 5DN, UK; Joseph.Padfield@ng-london.org.uk
Correspondence: k.kontiza.12@ucl.ac.uk
Current address: Department of Information Studies, University College London, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK.
Current address: Study Center classicA, Università Iuav di Venezia, 30135 Venice, Italy.
Current address: Department of Prehistory and Archaeology, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid/MIAS,
28049 Madrid, Spain.

Received: 17 January 2020; Accepted: 9 February 2020; Published: 23 February 2020




Abstract: Sustainability in Cultural Heritage (CH) is a complex question that needs to be addressed
by a group of experts tackling the different issues. In this light, the present work wishes to provide a
multi-level analysis of the sustainability in CH, using as an example a recent European H2020 project
(CrossCult) and the lessons learnt from its design, implementation and evaluation. The sustainability
of CH has qualitatively changed over the last few years, under the developments in digital technology
that seems to affect the very nature of the cultural experience. We discuss sustainability in venues
using digital technologies, covering a span of needs of small/unknown and large/popular venues,
which try to enhance the visitor experience, attract visitors, form venue networks, etc. Moreover,
we explore issues of sustainability of digital content and its re usability through holistic design.
Aspects of technology, human networks and data sustainability are also presented, and we conclude
with the arguments concerning the sustainability of visitor reflection, the interpretation of social and
historical phenomena and the creation of meaning.
Keywords: cultural heritage; sustainability; storytelling; digital humanities

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666; doi:10.3390/su12041666

www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

2 of 26

“Every visitor interaction is a story-making as visitors fit
portions of our collections into personal frames of reference;
most often in ways we neither intended nor anticipated.”
R.R. Archibald [1]

1. Sustainability through Cultural Heritage
According to the Council of Europe’s Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural Heritage
for Society (held in 2006 in Faro, Portugal), Cultural Heritage (CH) may be defined as “a group of
resources inherited from the past which people identify, independently of ownership, as a reflection
and expression of their constantly evolving values, beliefs, knowledge and traditions”. The European
Expert Network on Culture extended that definition with a notion of ‘heritage sector’ constituted by
specialised activities involving heritage and related to other social or economic sectors, which provides
jobs and generates growth. That direct impact is augmented by the social and economic effects of
CH in other fields, such as agriculture, regional development, environment, science and education,
tourism, technology, innovation, social cohesion, intercultural dialogue, etc [2].
The aforementioned implications have been highlighted by numerous scientific studies,
to the point that many policymakers now consider CH as one of the four pillars of sustainable
development [3]. It contributes to sustainable growth through “a creative combination of the legacy of
the past with innovative ideas aimed at shaping the future”, raising the profiles of places to make them
more competitive in a globalised world, and serving as a source of inspiration for the contemporary
arts and creative industries [4]. However, the sustainability of CH itself is being jeopardised whenever
one of the following two opposites is reached:
•

•

On the one hand, the pressure exerted on popular museums, buildings, archaeological sites
or historical city centres (e.g., as a consequence of mass tourism) poses growing challenges to
heritage professionals, institutions and stakeholders to protect and enhance the cultural assets
as well as the territory around them. In the era of mobile devices, social media and massive
consumption of information (quick and shallow reading, limited reflection), popular exhibits
even face the risk of being deprived of their meaning, becoming ornamental stuff for casual
photographs or suffering de-essentialising cultural appropriation [5].
On the other hand, the lesser-known heritage—which is widespread—oftentimes incurs
significant management and preservation costs for the benefit of reduced numbers of residents
or visitors. In many cases, especially for the intangible heritage of social minorities, the levels
of awareness and visibility are very low, and there are increasing risks that the heritage will be
lost in a matter of a few years or decades. Practical loss may still happen if the heritage has been
captured in digital form, but it remains in isolated and unconnected archives.

During the last decades, Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) have altered
the ways in which CH information can be gathered from, managed by and delivered to residents,
tourists, businesses, Humanities experts and policymakers. In this paper, we describe how some
of the recent advances can contribute to CH sustainability -to both alleviate the pressure on
the popular assets/venues and increase the preservation and valorisation of the lesser-known
ones—by empowering the aforementioned stakeholder groups in different ways. Specifically,
we present evidence gathered during the H2020 project CrossCult (www.crosscult.eu) about how
technology-powered storytelling can contribute to the sustainability of the heritage kept by museums
(in different ways depending on their size, popularity and topics) by presenting historical knowledge,
interrelated facts and events, interpretations and narratives across countries and cultures to
non-specialist audiences in an engaging way. The project can be considered a representative of
the state-of-the-art, as it dealt with semantic reasoning technologies [6] to bring together multiple
exhibits according to different criteria, with personalisation and recommendation systems to address
the personal context that the museum visitors bring with them [7], with different storytelling and

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

3 of 26

gamification strategies to assess the value of playful elements towards reflection and engagement
with the venues and exhibitions [8,9], with location tracking and path routing optimisation to ensure
that each visitor were navigated through the conceptually-linked exhibits while avoiding congested
spaces as much as possible [10], and with innovative practices to address visitors’ interaction with the
physical context of the museum [11].
The Heritage venues participating in the project acted as demonstrators of these technologies
and pilots for experimentation with visitors. Experiments took place in different Heritage venues of
historical interest, meant to be representative of the different CH venues found across Europe in terms
of their audience, needs, objectives and constraints:
•
•

•
•

A vast transnational collection hosted at the National Gallery in London that wanted to invite
visitors to explore conceptually linked exhibits that interest them the most.
Four thematically similar archaeological sites (the Roman healing spa of Lugo in Spain, the Roman
healing spa of Chaves in Portugal, the archaeological site of Montegrotto Terme in Italy, and the
sanctuary of Epidaurus in Greece) that wanted to use narratives to connect their local heritage
with other venues and broader European context.
A small but invaluable collection hosted at the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis that aimed to
present non typical itineraries through its museum exhibits.
Two cities (Malta and Luxembourg City) connected through the topic of historical migration,
that invite people to walk and serendipitously discover hidden stories or contribute their own.

In the following subsections, we explain how the aforementioned technologies touched different
facets of CH sustainability, with examples from the project’s pilot experiments. First, Section 2 looks
at key aspects of sustainability within CH venues, from the big and most famous to the small and
relatively unknown. Then, Section 3 discusses the sustainability of the different types of narratives
delivered by the storytelling approaches, in relation to the effort and cost incurred by the content
creation processes. Lastly, Section 4 focuses on sustainability within the CH ecosystem (ecosystem
here is defined as all the ‘living organisms’ (data, objects, systems) and actors in a particular area
(CH) considered together with their physical environment (venue)): The technology itself, discussing
the advantages enabled by the open source philosophy and the professional profiles demanded in
Digital Humanities (DH), the actors and dynamic groupings (such as GLAM labs), highlighting their
mediating role to facilitate external audience engagement and interaction with the (technology and
data) CH system and finally the data that underpins the operation of the technology, considering
the opportunities generated by the wealth of content digitised during the last decades, as well as
the challenges derived from the different standards and reference models and from varying levels of
reliability of the information sources.
2. Sustainability within Venues
Since Falk and Dierking published ‘The Museum Experience’ 20 years ago, most exhibitions
and programs are designed with careful attention not only to aspects of the physical context (such as
lighting, color, placement of objects, and readability of text) but also to the visitors’ personal and
socio-cultural contexts, which conform unique backgrounds of prior experiences, interests, knowledge,
motivations, beliefs, and values. According to their suggested framework, “the museum experience
begins before the visit to the venue, includes experiences within its premises (interactions with staff
and members of one’s own group, as well as with other visitors, exhibitions, interpretive materials
and programs) and continues long after the visitor leaves” [12]. In order for technology to underpin
sustainable visiting models, it must be able to reach those different stages and make the most of the
users’ time and attention, by providing them with the right kind of information. The CrossCult project
approached this challenge in different ways within the multifaceted cultural venues involved, though
always relying on storytelling strategies in order to ensure coherence of the end-to-end experiences
and foster the intended cognitive phenomena.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

4 of 26

2.1. Sustainability in Large Venues
The first CrossCult use case took place at the National Gallery (NG) in London, visited by
5.7 million people in 2018 (visitor figure available through the Association of Leading Visitors Attraction
(ALVA)—see https://www.alva.org.uk/details.cfm?p=423) and well-aware of sustainability issues
faced by a large venue. This section will focus on explaining how personalisation technologies
and the stories behind recommended sets of pictures, addressed some of the venue sustainability
challenges. The created CrossCult NG application aimed to sustain visitors physical interaction with the
venue (wayfinding) and increase visitors knowledge and interest of an interconnected, multi-themed
collection, of more than 2.600 paintings, that narrates the story of European art, masterpiece by
masterpiece. The quotes presented in this section were collected during the last phase of evaluation
for this venue that took place in June, August and December of 2018, where the think aloud protocol
was used to capture participants’ thoughts and experience [13]. We used a snowball method of
recruiting participants—12 volunteers (10 female) with ages ranging from 30 to 65—via the researchers’
professional networks (art historians, heritage scientists, curators, other museum professionals). While
the participants work at CH field only half of them had a good prior knowledge of the NG collection.
Once inside a large venue, there is often a high degree of freedom and choice in terms of what to
look at, discuss, and do. It was the CrossCult vision that a bespoke mobile app could contribute to
(i) encouraging visitors to think about topics that personally interested them, by connecting seemingly
disparate paintings together, and (ii) the process of reflection, by encouraging visitors to connect trains
of thought between the different paintings. Accordingly, the CrossCult NG (https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=eu.crosscult.pilot1.ng&hl=en) app was created to guide the visitors through
the NG collection, providing recommended short tours or highlighting individual paintings, based on
a user’s preferences, activities and physical location [14]. The application aimed to demonstrate that,
by properly presenting curated sets of paintings, it is possible to (i) facilitate and promote the discovery
and exploration of connections among the subjects depicted, the painters themselves, and events across
the physical collection displayed over more than 69 galleries, and at the same time (ii) help visitors to
access and navigate around the venue in a more balanced and dynamic way. The app detects the user’s
location in the building, takes into consideration visitors’ tolerance to crowds and reduces the pressure
on certain rooms by fostering greater interest for paintings other than the ‘must-see masterpieces’.
The personalised NG app experience was designed to strengthen the engagement with the
collection through the interaction with the app, before, during and after the visit. The engagement
can be initiated at any point, even before the visitors’ arrival to the Gallery building. By following a
process of short steps, the visitors prepare and tailor their visit, by building a user initiated profile,
which is then used by the app to recommend groups of paintings and stories. To accommodate the
needs of visitors that are less confident or knowledgeable about art, instead of asking them direct
questions about their favourite artist or art period, the app introduces them to the NG Collection with
a carousel of paintings (see Figure 1a). This pre-curated set of paintings is used by the profiling system
to build a first, a-priori profile. The user can stop this process at any time as the profiling algorithm
needs only a minimum of 3 paintings to begin making recommendations on the whole collection.
During the profiling process steps, the visitors could also (i) configure different settings such as the
time available for the visit and whether they are alone or visiting in a group, (ii) see how far they have
progressed during the carousel interaction and continue if they want to, (iii) further customise their
profile by selecting their interests from a curated list of keywords and finally (iv) state how fast they
walk when they visit a museum on average (see Figure 1b). While the user interacted with the app,
by visiting rooms and specific paintings, the profile kept updating in the background.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

5 of 26

Figure 1. This Figure presents some highlighted features and functionalities of the National Gallery
CrossCult app: (a) Top left hand corner, the ‘Art taste elicitation’ panel contains screenshots of the
carousel of paintings: Users swipe right or left through a stack of images from the top 100 paintings of
the NG Collection to indicate what they like or dislike. (b) top right hand corner, the ‘Visits settings
and Interests’ panel contains screenshots of the settings configuration. (c) bottom left hand corner,
the ‘Start the Visit’ panel contains screenshots of the app personalised recommendations presented to
the user, once the profiling process was completed. By clicking on the map the visitors could access
the current content of a Room, receiving fresh information from the Gallery’s content management
system through the NG research Beta API. (d) bottom left hand corner, the ‘Narratives - Storytelling’
panel contains screenshots of the app recommended pre-defined stories and narratives, under specific
themes, to allow visitors to experience the collection through different lenses.

We observed that personalisation and profile building can be used as a technique to set the
foundation of a relationship that can be built in time between the visitor and the CH venue and that,
for the participants who were very familiar with the collection, the profiling process provoked a
range of positive emotional reactions which were mainly associated with the act of new discovery.
For example, P11 “While I am a person that knows what I like, it surprised me, some of the paintings I
didn’t know we had and [the carousel] showed me some of my favourite pictures, so. . . ”, P01 “This one
I didn’t realise we had it in the collection I haven’t seen it before”, P01 “it introduced me to a couple of
things I didn’t know which is great and you have a collection you think you are familiar with and shows
you things you don’t know about so that is interesting. . . ”. The connection of the visitors with the
collection was initiated during the expressed reactions of liking or disliking a painting; the pre-curated
sets of paintings, presented through the carousel of paintings strengthened the inter-connectivity
of a multi-themed collection and the carousel interaction enabled the act of information and object
discovery for some of the participants by giving them a new way into the collection. For some of
the visitors this connection process enhanced their familiarity with the collection and sustained their
intellectual journey of discovery, building at the same time future engagement with the CH venue
and the collection. For example P01 “Animals, Saints, Furnitures, Boats so if you went for just one
or more specific, that makes a lot of sense if they are affecting my paintings. . . I think the choices
were limited but for this experience to give. . . you a way in to get into the collection it is quite nice. . . I
should probably go and have a look at that too. This was connected to my choices. . . boats. . . I felt with
this one putting in the parameters of what I was doing I was able to get information out of the app
that I wanted and also in some cases looking for more information that perhaps was not there but it
encouraged me to look around outside of the app and see things that I was not aware they were there.”

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

6 of 26

One of the main features of the CrossCult NG app experience, accessible before and during
the physical visit, was the digital map. It promotes sustainability within the venue as a building
by augmenting the familiarity of the visitors with the sense of place; it also allowed the visitors to
pre-plan their visit, familiarise with the building and the different floors, and get a grasp of the Gallery
size even before they arrive and maximise the limited time they might have available (see Figure 1c).
Once the visitors were in the building, the app automatically detected their position, so that they could
see where they were and ask for routing information to navigate from one room to the other. While
visitors walked through the rooms, the app displays a preview of the content of the room they were
currently in, a preview of the paintings currently on display. Visitors could also use the map to locate a
painting within the Gallery and get indications on how to reach it.
While some of the participants in the evaluation had a good prior knowledge of the collection and
the building, all of them stressed the difficulty of finding their way in the Gallery rooms. The difficulty
to navigate through the physical space at the Gallery (wayfinding) and how the digital map with the
automated indication of their current location supported them in making decisions on where to go,
was highlighted; P01 “you can spend half an hour in Gallery and not have seen anything because you
are looking around for something”, P11 “ok so now I embark, so here I am trying to figure out which
Room I am in, this was actually really good, it pretty much understood the Room I was in right away
which was really useful because a few times I looked for Room numbers to match the Room numbers
on the map but I couldn’t find them on the Rooms”, P12 “But then once that is there is so. . . it is so
intuitive to. . . it is so nice having. . . when you are in a big Gallery, having a route and specific things to
look at and to kind of narrow it down, something that it is going to direct you to specific things rather
than just wander around”.
With their location detected by the app, visitors could ask the app to display a route to visit a
painting in a dynamic way and follow the proposed recommendations for a group of paintings on
the digital map; the app detected the visitors location in the building and displayed a path for them
to follow from their current location to the paintings location. If they decided to visit another room
not indicated in the path, then the path dynamically updated. During this personalised discovery
of information, objects and stories, either by following a path or diverting from it, the participants
curiosity was sparked, which allowed them to reflect on prior learning and previous experience
and fostered greater interest for new information discovery of not such well known paintings of the
collection. For example, the recommended set of paintings while following the app’s designated path
P12 “sort of encouraged me to focus on things that I want, some things that I have taken for granted
sometimes, so I managed to focus on different details and to look at things in a different way that I
normally do” and on the recommended set of paintings while deviating from the app’s designated
path P11 “so that was really interesting because I wouldn’t had stopped at this painting otherwise”.
For venues that host well-known and highly-visited artworks in their collections, the breadth
and scale of their visiting audiences varies from ‘rebouncing’ visitors that aim to contemplate with
their favourite painting in quietness, to ‘buzzing’ crowds that visit for their first time Van Gogh’s
’Sunflowers’. We have observed that the discovery of recommended groups of paintings lead
participants to elaborate upon the connections between personal experiences and what they have read
or noticed about the artworks. This part of their visiting experience also fostered their curiosity by
encouraging discovery of other paintings either in the same room or in other less crowded rooms.
For example P08 “I spotted something on the walk- and this is where I stopped it wasn’t anything
it was just a picture I was walking through it’s just I wanted to discover a bit more about it and felt
comfortable to come out [of the path] and learn a bit more about that painting then go back in the tour,
so I would so for instance I would rather see less famous works where I could actually move around
easily then to be in room so full as this where I can not enjoy them I can’t it really wasn’t a pleasant
experience but I how would the app with know where all the people are? yes I would rather have
gone to less famous if you like examples of pictures with colour obscure ones where there are few
people then to be crowded like that which I found really irritatingly difficult”.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

7 of 26

As a preamble to Section 3 where we discuss in more detail the sustainability of digital storytelling,
we will briefly highlight here the relevance of the CrossCult NG stories for a large venue (see Figure 1,
(d)). The NG had previously experimented with stories and narratives that visitors could print
in advance and explore when they arrive. However because of their fixed format, they could
not accommodate paintings’ change of location as they were published as static resources in PDF
format. In the CrossCult project, we explored the dynamic digital storytelling approach, taking into
account the paintings change of location, that is rather crucial for a CH institution that needs to
accommodate movement of paintings due to loans, conservation, in-house exhibitions etc. In addition
to the pre-curated set of paintings for the carousel interaction that showcased the diversity and
inter-connectivity of the collection, the app also recommended a second set of pre-defined stories
and narratives, under specific themes; the CrossCult stories, a compilation of short descriptions for
paintings, are grouped under a narrative that stems from a theme (i.e, Materials and Technique, Social
Connections, Historical Events).
From the analysis of the participants’ commentary on the reenactment of their visiting experience,
it became more and more evident that the act of reading complementary alternative digital texts to
the traditional descriptions, encourages a closer reading of the painting [13]. Storytelling and the
connection of artworks in a narrative encouraged participants to further investigate and interpret what
they have read or observed about the artwork. It also lowered the entry bar of engagement with the
app, since the audience is familiarised with other more static storytelling approaches (such as audio
guides). The process of thinking about and rediscovering the artworks from a different viewpoint
initiated a process of a re-familiarisation with the collection, that is fully in line with the sustainability
aspects raised at the beginning of this section. For some of them this process allowed them to scratch
the surface of the network of links between creators (artists), places and events depicted in the paintings
of the collection; P11 “it stopped me and made me think about the fabrics, and because I had fabrics in
mind I was looking at those aspects of the painting too, I think more that I haven’t before. These are
paintings I walk past every day”, P09 “so I was reading and then looking at the painting and I
found interesting the description because I am familiar with this type of iconography but I found out
interesting things”.
2.2. Sustainability in Small Venues
As one representative of the thousands of small European museums that face significant
sustainability issues, the CrossCult project ran one pilot at the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis,
in Greece. This museum receives very low numbers of visitors, owing to the fact that it is far from the
main tourist destinations of the country, that it hosts items that are not known to the public and that it
follows an old-fashioned approach in exhibiting items, with minimum information next to each exhibit
and no digital presence. The fact that the museum fails to raise interest among the locals represents an
additional flaw.
The CrossCult consortium addressed the question of whether technology-powered storytelling
could allow such venues to enrich the experience they provide to the visitors, in the belief that the
sustainability of visitor inflow (and the very viability of small museums) depends on the intelligent
combination of content and technology to attract visitors. Following Falk and Dierking observations,
we created a set of web and mobile apps aiming to start interactions with potential visitors before
they even bothered to search the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis on a map, to fill in their visits
with thought-provoking content once they were there, and to keep the reflection going on social
networks afterwards.
Before the visit, the potential visitor could play specially-designed games, which served both to
gain online presence and to create a user profile, identifying specific visitor interests and needs to be
supported during the actual museum visit. The games were connected to the museum content and
the narratives that could be explored during the visit, thus introducing specific topics. User testing
revealed that the games were indeed very effective accomplishing both targets: Advertisement and

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

8 of 26

profiling. In particular and in regards to profiling the implemented games were successful in predicting
participants’ personality styles in 88% of the time (comparisons to actual psychometric tests), which is
an invaluable input to pre-select the topics that they could be most interested in from among the many
narratives that we created [15,16].
Being yet another small archaeological museum in the periphery in Greece, the stories created
by the CrossCult historians to be delivered during the visits went beyond the expected and provided
a non-typical experience, focusing on social aspects of life in Antiquity. In the creative process, we
roughly followed Lambert’s model for digital storytelling [17,18], with several rounds of selecting
focal points from among the physical museum objects, finding appropriate visual material (also from
external sources), and enhancing with personal elements and emotions.
According to the museum personnel and their director, focusing on such topics as women’s lives
in Antiquity and their role in society, could attract new visitors and make the museum content more
appropriate for different kinds of visitors. The connections between the ancient society and the current
one emerged through the narratives and provided plenty of reflection points. With the app providing
food for thought, it came as no surprise in expert user tests that the duration of the visits can increase
significantly in comparison with what happened in the original setting, that the visitors would simply
wander inside the venue for a few minutes and go away with nothing but unconnected, shallow bits of
information. Taking as reference the figures that an average museum visit lasts around 30 min, and the
average time spent in front of exhibits is around 30 s [19], with the designed narratives we increased
the overall duration to 40–45 min and the time in front of selected exhibits to 2–5 min, which are clear
indicators of engagement and learning. Those 40–45 min were indeed our target during the creation of
the narratives, as longer time would cause museum fatigue [20,21].
The CrossCult pilot for the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis was evaluated different types
throughout the project regarding different aspects (e.g., technical, content, experience). There were in
total seven data collection studies but for the purposes of the current work we will use quotes from
Study 5 (focusing on social reflections of participants) and Study 7 (focusing on individual reflections
of visitors). Both studies used the snowball method of recruiting participants, via the researchers’
professional networks. The participants were all from the general public, not museum experts. S5 took
place in December 2017 with 36 participants (16 males and 20 females, ages ranging from 20 to 55) [13].
After visiting the museum, S5 participants were asked to participate in a social media discussion
regarding certain aspects of their experience on one of the museum topics: Appearance of women
today and in antiquity. S7 took place in October 2018 with seven volunteers of which there were four
female with ages ranging from 40 to 69 (artist, architect, midwife, housewife) and three males with
ages ranging from 44 to 76 (medical doctor, film director, private sector employee). The think aloud
protocol was used to capture participants’ thoughts and experience, as they visited the museum.
User testing also showed that the visitors actively engaged with the digital content and they
went beyond simply memorising facts to higher cognitive levels, such as reflection about historical
and social phenomena. There were clear signs of reflective processes of app evaluation participants.
For example, one user reflected upon the practices of arranged marriages in antiquity and mentioned:
S7_P1 “That is very young that they got married. . . that must be difficult for a teenager. . . very young
girl”, following with comparisons of such practices around the world in today’s societies and his
personal feelings about the issue. Another user evaluated the experience she just had with the app
and concluded: S7_P2 “Also allows the visitor to clarify certain things to make him think of issues he
had not thought about previously”. Such increased reflection processes can be further linked with the
quality of the visitor experience and thus the sustainability of visitor numbers in the venue [22,23].
Moreover, visitors reported increased curiosity (e.g., S7_P3 “I would like to know who educated the
children inside the house. . . the parents, their environment, teachers?”) and many mentioned that
they would look into certain aspects more, even if fewer engaged in further exploration and actively
explored the extra material available in the app (e.g., links to the literature sources, relevant games,
documentaries and press articles). In any case, the triggered curiosity must be seen as a better quality

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

9 of 26

of visitor experience [24,25], also linked to venue sustainability [26]. One cultural informatics expert
used the app and mentioned that she liked it so much that she (S7_P6) “needed longer time and
wanted more stuff”.
After the visit, the app users could share their experience in social media, further promoting
the venue to their circles of friends. Vivid discussions followed the museum visit where visitors
exchanged opinions regarding the app content and the stories presented to them [27]. For example,
the 36 people that participated in these social media discussions, discussed for one week issues related
to appearance (women’s, nudity, appearance as a code, etc). A special discourse analysis revealed
that participants reached upper level cognitive processes, like analysis, emotional activation and
evaluation of information [13]. Overall from both studies the qualitative analysis showed that the
participants engaged in social reflective processes and exchanged opinions, using facts, building
arguments, enhancing cultural understanding and reaching conclusions, S5_P1 “It is striking, however,
that women were exercising much more than some later epochs of western European history”. In many
cases, people made comments that show that their empathy increased, since they tried to imagine
how people must have felt in past times and different societies. When explicitly asked for feedback
about the app, users reported that it did add important value to the museum experience. Some
indicative comments follow: S7_P2 “I think that the app is adding value to the museum”, S7_P3“this
app definitely helps people in understanding how people thought in past societies, how their society
was. . . their way of life, their traditions, their culture”, S7_P7“It (the app) helps people to focus their
thoughts and get more deeply into the questions. . . to reflect on your contemporary life”.
These findings were corroborated in another CrossCult pilot in which an app was created to let
users discover the heritage and history of one archaeological site (the Roman healing spa of Lugo in
Spain, the Roman healing spa of Chaves in Portugal, the archaeological site of Montegrotto Terme in
Italy, and the sanctuary of Epidaurus in Greece), while highlighting the commonalities and differences
with regard to the others [28,29]. Unprecedented levels of engagement, increased duration of the visits
and notable reflection processes were observed during the user tests conducted in the four venues,
revealing the power of the wider historical and geographical context when it comes to interpreting
heritage, as well as the value of cross-border narratives towards the goal of viewing the past as a
shared, common experience. This experience also evidenced the potential for reusing entire narratives
or their constituent elements, which is key to the feasibility of storytelling approaches, as explained in
the next section.
3. Sustainability of the Narratives
Storytelling has long been used by CH institutions as a method of communication and
interpretation. Having human guides telling explicit stories to visitors, while guiding them through the
collections of the cultural site remains one of the most effective and popular means nowadays [30,31],
but it entails significant costs that can not always be afforded. Audio guides came into scene in
the 1980s, fostering more individual experiences and shifting the main costs of storytelling from
the human resources to the production of the audio assets and the purchase and maintenance of
the devices. During the last decade, the widespread adoption of interactive mobile devices with
notable computing and networking capabilities, along with the corresponding changes of content
consumption models, have led to extensive experimentation with new forms of interactive storytelling
in the CH sector [32–36]: Historical podcasts, YouTube channels of philosophy and art-related videos,
video games with a historical background,. . . all the way to the minimalist extreme represented by
the Facebook account “Classical Art Memes”, that has grown to 5.4 million followers sharing and
commenting on images excerpted from paintings, linked to ongoing events. Accordingly, the CrossCult
project sought to experiment with different types of narratives in the pilots.
Anyways, now that the cost of the devices has been largely transferred to the visitors,
the sustainability of technology-powered storytelling depends on effectively supporting the creative
and curatorial processes needed to develop experiences that are attractive, engaging and factual.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

10 of 26

Whereas the old audio guides delivered one only narrative—with recordings in multiple languages—to
all the visitors, nowadays it is common to offer a menu of choices, multiple paths, driven by more or
less complex interactions, and all sorts of visual content, from pictures to immersive 3D environments.
Valtolina [37] provided an overview of software tools that aim to facilitate the work, coming to the
conclusion that this is a niche market still at an incipient stage, and that it is necessary to develop
further the capability to involve a variety of users groups with different backgrounds. In the meantime,
researchers keep devising new models, algorithms and artificial intelligence techniques that may
be integrated in those tools, e.g., to navigate large online knowledge bases in search for possible
associations among artworks, historical events, locations or people that could be turned into interesting
stories [8], to automatically retrieve multimedia contents that may be used to illustrate whichever
topics [38,39], or to allow museum objects to self-organise and cooperate with other exhibits in order to
make comprehensible stories [7]. All in all, the state of the art is such that museum curators and other
participants can be given valuable aids in the creative processes of creating stories, but it does not seem
feasible (or even desirable) to automate the whole tasks end-to-end, at least in the medium term [40].
Valtolina’s proposed framework for storytelling in CH emphasised the fact that, when narratives
comply with certain structures, they can have elements that may be re-used and re-combined in
other settings. For example, if the topics are categorised from the most specific to the broadest ones,
then it should be possible to adapt existing materials to get new stories for new venues with little
effort and cost. Technology still falls short to help in the characterisation of reusable assets, in the
hierarchical classification of topics and in the adaptation of existing stories to fit new contexts, among
other challenges. However, there exist guidelines, patterns and aids for certain types of narratives,
including the ones we assessed in the CrossCult pilot experiments, where we used pre-orchestrated
narratives to convey venue messages.
The specific attributes of contemporary mobile technologies significantly affect the content of
a narrative and the experience of it [41]. In line with Marshall McLuhan’s famous adage that ‘the
medium is the message’, the medium will often impact the way a narrative is told, distributed,
and experienced [42]. The CrossCult platform provided a content management system for curating
digital and dynamic CH stories, which takes into account the paintings change of location; the system
allows curators and experts to create thematic narratives while their content is dynamically filtered by
the CrossCult app to show only paintings that are currently on display. The beta version, connected to
the back-end of the NG, has been used to create the stories related to the paintings or artists of the NG
Collection. With the essential contribution of humanities experts, CrossCult developed a narrative
strategies that allowed their sustainability even after the end of the project.
We conceptualised a model for the structure of the narratives, which would enrich the personalised
and context-aware experiences of the CrossCult app (the model is available at the project’s deliverables
D2.4. Refined digital cultural resource data and data structure and D2.5. Upper-level cultural heritage
data structure and ontology, both publicly available at https://www.crosscult.eu/en/resources/
deliverables/). One of the structures that we proposed is recursive, meaning that a story can be
composed of many elements. These elements acted as containers for carrying the range of additional
pieces of information that contribute to the overall narrative and connect the narrative to a physical
object. For example, a sculpture of an ancient woman connected to the topic “daily life” was not
simply accompanied by a single digital image of that artefact but also by a short video describing the
daily life of a woman in ancient Greece, an additional image of a similar sculpture dated to the Roman
times, a piece of narrative about motherhood in Antiquity, an audio serving as an initial trigger prior
to engaging with the item itself, etc. This model allows for the creation of reusable multi-hierarchical
narrative structures and elements that may re-combined into numerous variation presented in Figure 2.
Specifically, we used it to produce 9 complete stories for the NG CrossCult app, each one containing 5
to 7 paintings. An illustration of this model with NG paintings that could also point to and connect
with the other CH venues of the project is discussed later on in this section.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

11 of 26

Figure 2. This Figure presents an illustration of the CrossCult stories model and its recursive structure:
(a) Each block (painting, text, transition link) in this sequence (objects 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2) describes
one aspect of the related painting. (b) Each sub-unit (see the magnified puzzle pieces on the top
right-hand side corner, subtitle and interpretative text and trigger for reflection) provides a highlight.
(c) All sub-units (up to 7 in our case) present a story (CrossCult topic 1) that connects objects under
a specific theme, the interpretive narrative (heading theme, cover paragraph/introduction, (see the
magnified puzzle pieces on the bottom left-hand side corner).

The interpretive design of the narratives communicates cultural values by connecting the tangible
form with the intangible meaning within the limitations of the human processing time: 1 to 2 min
assigned per each interpretive unit (individual text per painting, up to 200–250 words on average).
In terms of the writing style, the message conveyed is concrete: The use of the passive voice is avoided,
while the present tense is dominating the scene. Written language is straight-to-the-point and as
expressive as possible, while technical terms are strictly avoided and explained. The purpose of the
interpretive text is to assist the reader to extract essential elements related to the scene or the subject
being depicted in the painting and it concludes with questions that act as triggers for the reader to
reflect on the information presented. These blocks of text do not need to be read in a particular order,
which makes the structure flexible enough to accommodate changes. Currently, all the produced
content for the 9 stories has been added to the NG Collection management system and is also in
use at the NG website (adapted for the in-depth description of the painting—see https://www.
nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/jan-steen-a-peasant-family-at-meal-time-grace-before-meat).
For the pilot experiment connecting the Roman healing spas of Lugo [43] and Chaves [44],
the thermomineral archaeological site of Montegrotto Terme [45–48] and the sanctuary of
Epidaurus [49,50], we created an app that presents the users with successive bits of a story that
describes aspects of life in Roman times. Starting from the phenomenon of healing waters, that was
attested both in ancient Greek society and in the Roman Empire, we selected some contexts in which
the waters, curative and sacred, played the main role in social dynamics; then, we wrote a story in
five episodes that intended to highlight the most important archaeological aspects of each venue with
an accessible language and fostering gradual discovery of the ancient settlements and their natural
resources, step by step. Thus, the users can learn about chronology and location, the importance of
water to human settlements, the use of thermal spas in Roman Age, the relationship between health
and cult in that era, the pilgrimage routes enabled by the Roman roads, and the culture reflected in
buildings and statues. It was found in the first rounds of user testing that the potential to trigger

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

12 of 26

reflection depends heavily on linking the story to observations of the particular site that the user is
visiting; a generic, one-size-fits-all narrative would simply not do. Therefore, the overall concept had
to be adapted to the particular context of each venue. Fortunately, this could be done with relatively
little effort once the Humanities experts had agreed on the core messages and written the first text
version. Table 1 below compares, side by side, the text of the first episode of the story presented to
people who visit the healing spa of Lugo and those who visit the healing spa of Chaves (in italics,
the parts of the text that are venue and object specific).
Table 1. Side-by-side comparison of a passage of the narratives used in a sample of multi-venue storytelling.

Two travellers who came from the Roman city
of Brigantium by via XX were attacked on their
horses by aggressive dogs. They managed
to escape but with some injuries. One of the
travellers was wounded in the right leg while
the horses had several cuts and bites from
the dogs. They continued travelling slowly
but they were exhausted, so, as it was late,
they decided to spend the night there settling
by the river and getting some comfort near
the water.

Two travellers who came from the Roman city
of Bracara Augusta by via XVII were attacked
on their horses by aggressive dogs. They
managed to escape but with some injuries.
One of the travellers was wounded in the
right leg while the horses had several cuts and
bites from the dogs. They continued travelling
slowly but they were exhausted, so, as it was
late, they decided to spend the night there
settling by the river and getting some comfort
near the water.

The following morning, the travellers couldn’t
find the horses: Where had they gone?
The friends were desperate! How could they
arrive on foot to Asturica Augusta? After a
few minutes of stress, they decided to continue
their trip looking for their horses.

The following morning, the travellers couldn’t
find the horses: Where had they gone?
The friends were desperate! How could they
arrive on foot to Asturica Augusta? After a
few minutes of stress, they decided to continue
their trip looking for their horses.

During their trip they met people: Merchants During their trip they met people: Merchants
with their products, men and women on with their products, men and women on
litters with slaves, soldiers, but in particular litters with slaves, soldiers, but in particular
ill people on charts or walking with crutches. ill people on charts or walking with crutches.
Most of them were going to a settlement Most of them were going to a settlement
that appeared on the horizon: A long bridge that appeared on the horizon: A long bridge
spread across the river, and following it, on top spread across the river, and following it, they
of the hill, they could see the walls and towers of a could see the buildings of a town. In fact, they
city. In fact, they had reached the Roman city had reached the Roman city of Aquae Flaviae!
of Lucus Augusti!

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

13 of 26

Table 1. Cont.

Photograph: Balneario Romano de Lugo

Close to the river, beside a rock, they could Close to the river, beside a rock, they could
see their horses using the backwater of a big see their horses using the backwater of a big
building. Gods! They were safe! Where building. Gods! They were safe! Where
they were, the water seemed something they were, the water seemed something
‘magic’: There were some channels with really ‘magic’: There were some channels with really
hot water, as vapours came up, and the hot water, as vapours came up, and the
air smelled of sulphur. Moving close to air smelled of sulphur. Moving close to
the horses, the boys saw that the wounded the horses, the boys saw that the wounded
paws were practically healed: A miracle of a paws were practically healed: A miracle of a
deity, they thought immediately! However, deity, they thought immediately! However,
they understood that in that place there they understood that in that place there
were thermo-mineral sources and as Roman were thermo-mineral sources and as Roman
medicine taught, the sulphurous waters can medicine taught, the sulphurous waters can
cure the wounds. So the friends realised cure the wounds. So the friends realised
that the horses had instinctively gone to the that the horses had instinctively gone to the
mineral springs to find a natural cure and they mineral springs to find a natural cure and they
decided to have a time there. After many decided to have a time there. After many
hours and thanks to the use of these waters, hours and thanks to the use of these waters,
the wounded leg looked better.
the wounded leg looked better.
By reading this bit of story (and looking at the accompanying pictures), the app user becomes
acquainted with important elements like the natural and built elements of the ancient landscape,
the experience of healing, the presence of deities, some hints of ‘scientific’ knowledge many centuries
ago, people, types of transport, etc. This triggers processes at several cognitive levels: Understanding,
application (connections to contemporary practices of thermomineral treatment), analysis (different
reasons for healing), evaluation (appropriateness of the treatments) [13]. Caring for all such phenomena
in only one go of the creative and curatorial efforts made the development of the app much more
cost-effective than having to work separately for each venue. Besides, with the outputs properly

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

14 of 26

annotated and kept in a common repository (more about this in Section 4), it is easy to extend the app
to cover more than the four original venues: The personnel in charge of the adaptation simply has to
revise some passages of text and provide new pictures, in order to get an up-and-running experience
with a story that deals with certain concepts and has been proved to work well.
Similarly, the more than 70 narratives created for the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis involved
both venue-specific and venue-independent elements, allowing them to be reused in other settings:
Straightaway, in tens of small and medium-sized museums all over Greece, and with some more
editing (and adopting a more abstract or comparative focus) in many others worldwide. The narratives
for the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis were presented to the visitors in the form of videos. Subtitles
were also available for people with hearing impairments. The text in Table 2, although written for the
Archaeological Museum of Tripolis and the specific object shown in Figure 3, is one clear example
(in italics, the parts that are venue- and object-specific, to be removed or replaced for other contexts).
The same narrative can be used in different museums where images of ancient Greek girls and women
appear, like in the ones in Figure 4. Likewise, elements from other narratives that revolve around the
rich Greek mythology may be re-used with a cross-border perspective to reflect on comparisons with
myths coined in the places of origin of the museum visitors (e.g., comparing creation myths around
the world). Thus, by generalising reuse, small venues would increase their sustainability prospects,
providing meaningful experiences to the visitors with reduced cost of producing content.
Table 2. Sample text from a narrative written for the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis, highlighting
text that may be easily reused in other settings.
Archaeologists know that this is a young girl. While the head is not surviving, her clothes reveal
her age. Young girls in ancient Greece were usually wearing a long dress all the way to their feet
which also had an upper belt, attached to the body right under the breast. On your screen
(see Figure 5a) you can access images of fine examples of statues of young girls from other
museums. Observe this young girl and compare it with the image of an older woman you can
access on your screen (see Figure 5b). Older women were wearing more complicated
clothes. For example, they had a himation, a mantle or a wrap, which they wore over their chiton,
which was their dress and if they were married they also half covered their hair with a veil, like the
one shown in the photo. In this room, you can see examples of older women’s appearance and you
can compare it to the one of the young girl.

Figure 3. Museum item from the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis. Headless statuette of a young
girl. She bears a chiton reaching to the feet with an upper belt. The garment is held onto the chest with
straps. She holds a bird in her left hand, while she leans on a stele with her right hand (she leans on a
small pillar). Material: Marble. Found in the Bouleuterion of Mantinea. Hellenistic era work (4th-3rd
century BC). Dimensions: Height 0.65 m.

The cross-border perspectives, in particular, may be applied to increase the visibility of the small
and medium-sized venues, through references from the larger ones. The latter can deliver even richer
information linked to their exhibits (for example, by pointing to paintings that share topics and style
with one that really catches the visitor’s attention) while the formerly suddenly appear on the map
to the eyes of tens or hundreds of potential visitors. This can be done at practically no cost, but the
impact on the figures of the small museums can be significant: For example, if only 1 in every 100
visitors to the NG in London got to learn that some interesting cultural items can be found in the

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

15 of 26

Archaeological Museum of Tripolis, and only 1 out of 100 of those people eventually made a trip to the
Peloponnese (not necessarily for that purpose, of course), then this venue would experience a huge
increase in its number of visits. The technological infrastructure is not there yet to support and track
these promotion mechanisms, but it can be said that many of the technical challenges have already
been dealt with [51]. In addition, the narratives created for the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis
also connect the museum items with the places that they were originally found (i.e. archaeological
settlements, excavation sites of the Arcadia prefecture), thus connecting the museum with the different
archaeological locations. This strategy not only shows the locations of the items (augmented reality
and maps were used) but also increases the sustainability of the archaeological sites, since it promotes
further visits (all sites supported with augmented reality and maps are within one hour drive from the
museum). Thus, the museum becomes a central point in the exploration of the area around it.

Figure 4. (a) The image on the left hand side is a marble grave stele of a little girl ca. 450-440 BC from
the MET, available from https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/252890. (b) The image
on the right hand side is a grave stele of a young girl ‘Melisto’, Greek, Attic, ca. 340 BC, marble,
probably from Sounion—Arthur M. Sackler Museum, Harvard University.

The nine created narratives for the National Gallery CrossCult app (Titles: ‘Contemporary
Style—Fashion’, ‘Death’, ‘Monsters and Demons’, ‘Battles and Commanders’, ‘Warfare’, ‘Migration’,
‘Water’, ‘Women’s Lives’, ‘Women artists and famous women’) aimed at presenting essential elements
related to the scenes or the subject being depicted in the pre-selected paintings, whilst making
connections to the other three participating CH venues at the theme level. In collaboration with
the authors and editors of the Collections Information Project (http://network.icom.museum/cidoc/
blog/rupert-shepherd/), who were overseen by the NG curators, we delivered carefully-chosen stories
under the broader umbrella-terms ‘Social Connections’, ‘Materials and Techniques’, ‘Historical Events’,
pinned to traversal and crosscutting themes “narrated” by the other CrossCult participating CH
venues, such as ‘Daily life’, ‘Appearance’ or ‘Mortality’. Table 3 shows examples of how the narratives
presented to the visitors of the NG in London were connected to the Archaeological Museum of
Tripolis on a theme level with the potential to link to and reference specific items of the archaeological
collection under the same theme (in italics, the parts that show theme-based connections, between
customised narratives to the CH venues of the National Gallery and the Archaeological Museum of
Tripolis, that could be further expanded to make connections between the “participating” in the story
items of their collections).

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

16 of 26

Figure 5. Images (a) on the left hand side and (b) on the right hand side that are used in the narrative
presented in Table 2 and were appearing on the app screen.
Table 3. Examples of how narratives presented to the visitors of the NG in London were connected to
the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis.
CrossCult National Gallery stories
Women’s Lives

CrossCult narratives from the Archaeological
Museum of Tripolis
Daily life

Gendered roles, expectations and stereotypes can all be
communicated through paintings and many of the
works in our collection offer insight into ideas about
womanhood at particular points in history.

Ancient Greece is known about the great male
philosophers, politicians, warriors and artists.
But what about ancient Greek women? Where were
they? And what did they do?

Some genre paintings show women’s daily lives in
the home and the workplace; other paintings show
idealised figures based on classical myth or
religious stories.

Women, especially in Classical Athens, were
destined to become good wives and especially
good mothers. The ideal of a respectful woman is to be
indoors, at least till the end of the 4th century BC.
However, women from lower social classes could work
outdoors and even go to the Agora to sell
home-made products.

Follow this trail to discover how women have been
represented at different times and places across Europe.

Follow us on a journey inside the Oikos,
the family’s home, to know about the life of women
there.

Contemporary Style and Fashion

Appearance

Costume plays an important part in the way we
perceive people in portraits and figure paintings.
Just as the choices we make about our own clothing
speak volumes about ourselves, so too does the clothing
chosen by those who sit for their portraits.

The clothes you are wearing today, did you choose
them simply because you liked them or you want to tell
something to the world?

Yet while faces often appeal to us in a direct way,
the significance of dress can be less obvious to a
modern viewer.

Ancient societies also found appearance important
and clothes often function as a code between the person
and the world.

Artists also frequently have strong views about what the
people who sit for portraits should wear, so an outfit
may also say something about the artist as well as
the sitter, just as clothes in figure paintings can be used
to convey the essence of a person’s character.

Archaeologist use items’ appearance to understand what
this person was and the society he or she belonged to.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

17 of 26

Similarly and vice versa, a sculpture of an ancient woman from the Archaeological Museum of
Tripolis connected to the topic ‘Daily Life’, was not simply accompanied by a single digital image
of that artefact but also by a short video describing the daily life of a woman in ancient Greece,
an additional image of a similar sculpture dated to the Roman times, a piece of narrative about
motherhood in Antiquity, an audio serving as an initial trigger prior to engaging with the item
itself, etc. More specifically, some of the narratives presented to the visitor of the Archaeological
Museum of Tripolis were enriched with digital material from the NG, increasing digital connections
of the museum content and enhancing its collection. For example, when introducing the myth
of Artemis and Callisto at the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis regarding a statue of Artemis,
the narrative (see Table 4) presented a painting by Titian from the NG Collection (see Figure 6),
depicting exactly that topic and related content from the ‘Diana and Callisto’ Schools Project (see https:
//www.nationalgallery.org.uk/learning/teachers-and-schools/diana-and-callisto-schools-project).
Table 4. A sample of enriching narratives presented to visitors of the Archaeological Museum of
Tripolis with content from National Gallery London.
Accompanied narrative for object: 3084_arcadia, from the Archaeological Museum of Tripolis,
part of the greater topic ‘names, animals, myths’
Look at this simple tombstone, between the 1st and the 2nd century AD. Despite its simplicity this
particular item is of great importance for Arcadia. It bears the inscription HAIL ARCADIA, in the
honor of a deceased woman, who has the same name as this area. But the name Arcadia has its root
in mythology. According to the myth, once there was the beautiful daughter of Lycaon, the kind of
this area and she was called Callisto, meaning the most beautiful. Callisto was Artemis’ nymph and
had taken a vow to remain a virgin. But Zeus seduced Callisto and she got pregnant. Artemis soon
realized and she became furious, and so did Hera the wife of Zeus. Now the myth is not clear but
one of the two goddesses transformed the beautiful girl into a bear. As a bear Callisto gave birth to
a son called Arcas. Remember here in Greek bear is called Arctos or Arkouda and the name Arcas
and Arcadia come from that. Arcas was separated from his mother, since he could not grow up with
an animal. One day he went hunting and he nearly killed his own mother. But Zeus intervened and
prevented the murder by placing mother and son amongst the stars, as Ursa Major and Minor, star
constellations known as Great and Little Bear. And the myth goes further to explain why these two
particular constellations are always visible in the northern hemisphere and they never set. This is
because Hera cursed them to never rest.
On your screen you can see a famous painting (see Figure 6) by Titian, housed in the National Gallery
in London, picturing the scene in which Artemis discovers Callisto’s pregnancy. Imagine how she must
have felt. Titian beautifully shows her emotions. This particular painting has been used in educational
programs of the National Gallery in London (click here for related content from the Diana and Callisto’
Schools Project), to show how myths and art can be relevant to today’s students. You can also access a
very interesting video on the issue of art, myths and hidden pregnancies, as a part of an educational
curriculum for teenagers.
It seems that myths and art can be relevant to our modern lives. Can you think of more examples?

By developing narratives in this way, that provide links to other venues, CrossCult created a
network of different size and popularity venues. This interconnectivity of participating venues and
institutions is beneficial for all. Not only can smaller venues benefit from their links to large-known
ones, but by forming a network of venues and reusable narratives, all parties can gain access to
elaborated content. In this light, venues are not simply connected to repositories of digital cultural
data, but to ready-to-use content in the form of narratives that can be easily modified and applied in
different settings, thus increasing sustainability of all parties involved. Data sustainability is further
discussed below.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

18 of 26

Figure 6. Example of digital material enrichment for the object 3084_ arcadia, from the Archaeological
Museum of Tripolis. The Image of the painting Titian (NG6616), Diana and Callisto, 1556-9 ©The
National Gallery London/The National Galleries of Scotland, was part of the archaeological object
accompanied narrative, connecting it to the painting.

4. Sustainability within the CH Ecosystem: Technology, Actors, and Data
From the preceding sections, it follows that state-of-the-art Information and Communication
Technologies can facilitate many aspects of storytelling, from the identification of reusable narratives
or elements thereof, to the search for artworks related to any given topic, or the final presentation
of the stories to the potential/actual museum visitors through different media. We have explained
how storytelling can contribute to the sustainability within the venues—mainly related to numbers
of visitors—and discussed the sustainability of the storytelling itself—mainly related to the content
production costs. In our experience, the CrossCult app users were exposed to other groups’ cultures,
to comment, to advocate, to participate, to reflect, to personalise their CH experiences, supported by a
technological system (the CrossCult Platform) that functioned as “brick ties”, allowing both innovation
and the CH ecosystem—its users (reflective societies and museum audiences) and stakeholders (CH
venues)—to interact smoothly. Now the questions must be tackled of whether the technology itself can
be sustainable, as there may be significant hurdles regarding its adoption and success, whether people
related emerged approaches such as the Living Lab or the ‘Galleries, Libraries, Archives and Museums’
(GLAM) Labs are supportive and sustainable enough to facilitate CH workforce to make the digital
shift happen and finally whether current data flow processes and aggregation of CH data across a
variety of European institutions is a supportive and the most sustainable model for CH institutions to
move forward.
4.1. Sustainability of Technology
The first thoughts have to do with openness, covering the following elements (among others):
•
•
•
•
•

The openness of the software tools offered to the Humanities experts to curate digitised CH assets
and to create narratives.
The openness of the software systems that support platforms of ICT services for Digital Humanities.
The openness of the digitised CH archives from which the materials displayed by the narratives
are retrieved.
The openness of the standards and reference models that underpin the archives where the
aforementioned assets are kept.
The openness of the models adopted by many journals that publish the latest advances in DH research.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

19 of 26

As explained in [52], the principles of open source development have not only been massively
adopted in the software world, but they have also extended into many other realms, defining how
people interact and collaborate beyond the context of computers and mobile consumer devices.
The domains of CH and DH are no exceptions. The whole set of software systems offered by the
Apache Foundation, Wikipedia and Europeana, Open Linked Data resources, Creative Commons
licenses, open publishing and, in many cases, crowdsourcing and crowdfunding, share the vision that
information should be as freely and publicly accessible as possible. Besides, years of experience have
shown that distributed modes of collaboration can be highly effective. The CrossCult platform itself
was built on top of this spirit, and as shown in [53] most of the background systems it builds on are
open source, just like the foreground software created during the project will be.
However, as pointed out in a recent report on the state of open source [54,55], there is a
growing concern about how many projects that may be considered essential infrastructure can sustain
themselves indefinitely. Eghbal talks about a “free rider problem”, meaning that “resources are
offered for free, and everybody (whether individual developer or large software company) uses them,
so nobody is incentivised to contribute back, figuring that somebody else will step in.” Crichton
explains that this problem “has led to a brittle ecosystem, just as open source software reached the
zenith of its influence”, highlighting examples like OpenSSL—the library that encrypts most of the
communications on the web—being a project used in billions of installations, but maintained by a very
small team of individuals (only one of them working on it full-time). Those human resources represent
crucial weak spots to the software industry, which in the particular realm of DH could be soothed—at
least, to a significant extent—through public investment.
This niche area of employment will require highly-specialised profiles in DH, which are not
particularly furnished by higher education institutions anywhere around the world (e.g., the list of
Universities or Colleges compiled by the European Association for Digital Humanities (EADH) counts
as few as 20 entries, see https://eadh.org/education/digital-humanities-centres). James O’Sullivan
even wonders about what the DH people should be exactly: “A scholar, a domain-specific expert
who has advanced computational expertise, or a community builder whose scholarly expertise is less
important than the ability to engage others?” [56]. The experience of the CrossCult project shows
that the three facets are desirable in bridging the gap between Humanities and Technology experts,
because it was challenging to get people from the two different realms to understand one another,
and that understanding should not be reached with detriment to the goals of the joint projects. In this
particular project, this was achieved as a result of team effort, making sure that technologies and
designs were agreed by the whole consortium (not just the tech partners), that acceptance of the
technology was based on the users involved, and that human-friendly designs would be promoted
rather than technological complexity for complexity’s sake. One single person who had that knowledge
beforehand would have saved lots of time and boosted the project outcomes. “Ideally”, O’Sullivan
says, “the DH person would be all those things, a glorious amalgam that can single-handedly secure
funding, execute the day-to-day administration of all that precious capacity, lead a team of humanities
scholars and software developers, and maintain their own reputation as an international scholar.”
Again, the sustainability of the technology seems compromised by whether such paragons may be
abundant or exist at all. What today is feasible and cost-effective in limited settings, therefore, may
not be so easy to scale up. Thus, sustainability of technology in Digital Heritage seems to require a
paradigm shift, implying that expertise is not adequate in the individual level and should be built in
the group level.
4.2. Sustainability of Actors
Our thread of thinking naturally leads us to human networks and how the CH community
is supported to make the transition to the digital realm happen. CH institutions are champions
in building collaborative infrastructures on a regional, national, European and International level.
The urgent need of people in CH institutions “to innovate, feel empowered, trusted, tolerated and

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

20 of 26

investeworthy by thinking out of the box” (Dr Georgios Papaioannou, University College London in
Qatar and Ionian University, Corfu, Greece, quote available at https://glamlabs.io/), was highlighted
in various outputs of Innovation EU projects calls (https://cordis.europa.eu/programme/rcn/664455/
en). At the same time national CH institutions attempt to define their digital strategy (for example
https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/media/25328/strategic-plan_2018-2023.pdf) “to reflect a more
digital world”, whilst building on the research capabilities of their personnel, who is an intellectual
leader in their respective fields of expertise.
The International GLAM Labs Community (https://glamlabs.io/), a bottom up created initiative,
born in 2018 at an event on global ‘Library Labs’ held by the British Library, was attended by over
70 people from 43 institutions and 20 countries and followed up by a second global Labs meeting
at the Royal Danish Library in Copenhagen in March 2019. The community has now grown to
250 people, from more than 60 institutions, in over 30 countries and has also produced a how-to
guide “for cultural institution leaders looking to understand why their organisation might need a
GLAM Lab, and also for those workers who are making the case for one” (Seb Chan, Chief Experience
Officer, ACMI, Melbourne, quote available at https://glamlabs.io/books/open-a-glam-lab/). GLAM
labs (for example the Gardens, Libraries and Museums (GLAM) of the University of Oxford https:
//www.glam.ox.ac.uk/digital-strategy, the British Library Labs https://www.bl.uk/projects/britishlibrary-labs#) operate at the intersection of digital cultural heritage, innovation, technology and
creativity, to benefit organisations, users, society and culture, acting as facilitators of the GLAMs
community transition to the digital realm:
•
•
•

Instrumental for effecting the digital shift in cultural heritage institutions by challenging
traditional approaches;
Bringing institutions, technology, people and communities together through experimental ways
of working;
Based in a variety of cultural heritage institutions including national and state-based libraries,
university galleries, libraries, archives and museums.

In CrossCult, we have based our work on the approach proposed by Bergvall-Kåreborn: “A Living
Lab is a user-centric innovation milieu to build on everyday practice and research, with an approach
that facilitates user influence in open and distributed innovation processes, engaging all relevant
partners in real-life contexts and aiming to create sustainable values” [57,58]. The CrossCult Living
Lab implementation addressed specific areas (IPR and service modelling, stakeholders engagement,
experiments) including the sustainability of financing (financial contributions), public-private
partnerships, service infrastructure, and the management structure (commitment, responsibilities,
influence, promotion and communication of the project’s results and outcomes). Our implementation
worked on two closely-interconnected levels of governance; at the strategic level, that defines the
overall vision and framework of guidelines of the project (involving for example local stakeholders
and end-users or regional communities to adopt a common methodological approach towards the
defined fields of actions) under the Living Lab Umbrella (for example the Living Lab Steering Board).
At an operational level that referred to concretely running field actions (for example specific Living
Labs activities, related to the engagement of specific stakeholders, i.e, end-users).
In September 2019, the National Gallery and King’s College London jointly launched the
‘National Gallery X’ (NGX), a collaborative research and development (R&D) programme that will
explore the potential of new technologies for galleries in the future (https://www.nationalgallery.org.
uk/about-us/press-and-media/press-releases/national-gallery-and-king-s-college-london-launchnew-research-partnership-national-gallery-x-to-investigate-the-gallery-of-the-future), hosted at a
‘physical’ sandbox environment, a studio sitting next to the National Gallery (NG) building. The aim
of NGX is to allow for experimentation and exploration of technological inventions and how they
can be applied to CH institutions in the future, informing new kinds of cultural experiences over the
next decade. Building on expertise, accumulated through internal and external human networks,

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

21 of 26

consecutive long term collaborative projects such as Iperion CH (http://www.iperionch.eu/),
CrossCult, and participation in larger research infrastructures such as E-RIHS (http://www.e-rihs.eu/)
and SSHOC (https://sshopencloud.eu/), the NG managed to create a sustainable continuum of
overlapping CH research projects, where the CH ecosystem is sustained through the project outcomes,
that feed new questions to engage CH researchers and future audiences.
4.3. Sustainability of Data
In this final subsection, looking back to the CH datasets that we worked with and the lessons we
were taught by the CrossCult experience, we discuss whether current models of CH data flows to larger
aggregators is still a sustainable solution for all types of CH institutions or whether new paradigms
such as aggregation of CH data across and between CH European institutions, is gaining more ground
as a model to move forward for a more sustainable model within CH ecosystems. In the CrossCult
project, we experimented with both approaches; we demonstrated practical implementations for
sharing the CH datasets to larger collections aggregators such as Europeana but at the same time we
also facilitated inter-connections of multi-institutional CH collections and multiple venues, through
the selection of certain organisational patterns, data models, digital storytelling or even specific
software [59,60]. We postulate that the sole and one directional aggregation and linking of CH data
to larger external repositories, is not sufficient enough to provide meaningful connections between
CH institutions information resources, unless it is reinforced by connections to CH data modeling
standards and interconnections between CH information resources of the CH ecosystems themselves.
The first main principle that we followed in the CrossCult Consortium was to adopt, reuse
and extend were possible existing exemplary CH standards followed by the CH community. In this
respect, we used the Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) of the International Council of Museums
(ICOM)–International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC), CIDOC-CRM (ISO 21127:2014) to
model our data, which provides an object-oriented schema based on real world concepts and events,
implementing data harmonisation based on the relationships between things rather than artificial
generalisations and fixed field schema. The model has been gaining increased popularity and it is
considered to be a major standard in knowledge representation of CH data. The employment of the
CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model enabled us to integrate the disparate datasets of the participating
CH venues and institutions and their metadata under a common semantic layer, driving cross-search
and inference capabilities. It also enabled the CrossCult datasets to be sustainable through their linking
capabilities with other external CH datasets following the same standard and mutually benefiting
the participating CH venues and institutions by creating a network of supported venues, increasing
visibility and enhancement of their content.
Semantic Web technologies ease access to CH content by facilitating new ways of engaging
with heritage by the general public and experts that go beyond a simple interactive engagement.
They provide an intelligent integration of resources via machine readable and human interpretable
representations of a domain knowledge (i.e., ontology), enabling retrieval, reasoning, optimal data
integration and knowledge reuse of disparate CH resources. In CrossCult we used semantic web
technologies to ensure data backward and forward compatibility, so that the data could potentially
be “linked”, while the aid of external CH standard vocabularies (i.e., AAT https://www.getty.
edu/research/tools/vocabularies/aat/) and multi-hierarchical structures we used for the CrossCult
keywords, ‘glued’ the content of the CrossCult Knowledge base. In terms of data sustainability,
this approach facilitated data discovery and content engagement, since the participating CH venues
and institutions gain the same benefits from the linking and interconnections across the collections,
as their audiences and visitors do.
At the CH Institution level, the National Gallery experimented with setting up initially a sandbox
API (sandbox is defined here as the concept of having a place where ideas can demonstrate the purpose
of functionality) and PID system [61], to demonstrate the potential of reusing and connecting to CH
standards and to provide content for Crosscult. As a result of the work done in the CrossCult and

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

22 of 26

IPERION-CH project outputs (http://wiki.iperionch.eu/wiki/) organising and mapping the data in
the NG beta research API and the extensive testing carried out by Crosscult, the system is already
being used in the NG Middleware as part of the collections Information Project and the NG beta API
(https://data.ng-london.org.uk/) is slowly being replaced by an official institutional beta API, which
is still in development (see also the NG object description (61 triples) accessible as an interactive node
graph at https://rdf.ng-london.org.uk/modelling).
While our data modelling approach accommodated Interoperability and Reuse, we also made
the CrossCult datasets Findable and Accessible, addressing another set of guiding principles towards
data sustainability within the CH community, the FAIR Data Principles (see https://www.force11.org/
group/fairgroup/fairprinciples and guidelines on FAIR Data Management in Horizon 2020, available
at http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/hi/oa_pilot/h2020hi-oa-data-mgt_en.pdf) [62]; The project participated in the Open Research Data Pilot, which aimed to
make the research data generated by selected Horizon 2020 projects accessible with as few restrictions
as possible, while at the same time protecting sensitive data from inappropriate access. The CrossCult
datasets and scientific papers are available at the following repositories, Hypatia (http://hypatia.teiath.
gr/xmlui/handle/11400/20097 and https://library1.uniwa.gr/en/institutional-depository-hypatia/)
and Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/search?page=1&size=20&q=CrossCult&all_versions).
So, our last thoughts bring us back to openness; the theme of the last Museums and Tech
2019 conference (https://www.museumscomputergroup.org.uk/events/museumstech2019/) was
‘Openness: How can museums and other cultural organisations be more open in terms of their
collections and processes, is openness always desirable, and what barriers might we have to overcome
for truly open digital cultural heritage?’. Delivering his lightning talk, the NG’s Collections and
Information manager, stated that “Opening up our data already means that we can contribute to
the creation of large-scale datasets, keep our collections at the forefront of research, and extend the
ways in which users engage with our objects. However, now we’ve laid the foundations: This is just
the beginning.” [63], highlighting the fact that the fundamental principles of Access and Openness
within the CH ecosystem, even for a large CH institution such as the NG are still a long way towards
achieving data sustainability.
5. Sustainability through Reflection
The CrossCult H2020 project targeted visitors’ reflection in multiple levels. Wishing to show the
interconnections between locations, people, artefacts and concepts, the project used four pilots cases
to show how social and historical phenomena can be re-interpreted. In particular, one of the pilots
asked visitors to reflect on aspects of common European history through art, another one on women’s
place in past and today’s societies, a third pilot asked people to reflect on population movements
and migration, whereas a fourth one asked people to reflect on healing practices and the therapeutic
use of water. These reflection topics were chosen with sustainability criteria, since their generic and
contemporary character allows a richer cultural experience and further exploration in other projects.
While reflection in CH is essential (the European Commission states that “supporting
inclusive, innovative and reflective societies is a prerequisite for a sustainable European
integration”, see External advice and societal engagement: Towards the 2016 and 2017
work programme of ‘Inclusive, Innovative and Reflective Societies’ of Horizon 2020 available
at https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/sites/horizon2020/files/External%20advice%
20and%20societal%20engagement-SC6-2016-2017.pdf), technology does not yet facilitate fully the
exploration of such concepts, since constant customisation is needed and more tools are necessary.
This implies that stories, narratives and data need to be produced usually ad hoc for the current
needs of venues, adding more workload to venue personnel. Our current work provides templates
of narratives and guidelines for adaptation, trying to increase sustainability and support venues in
the digital transformation. By automating the generation of narratives and the composition of digital
CH resources to deliver meaningful interactive experiences to individuals and groups, we supported

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

23 of 26

venue digital strategies (see for example the National Gallery Strategic Plan, available at https://
www.nationalgallery.org.uk/media/25328/strategic-plan_2018-2023.pdf2018\T1\textendash2023) for
audience engagement with CH collections in terms of Learning, Access, Participation. Similarly,
the modular logic of the developed technology within CrossCult, also allows its easy adaptation to
various other venues. For example, tools like profilers, authoring tools, recommendation engines,
visitor tracking tools, etc. can be easily used for the purposes of other venues.
Finally and most importantly, (audience) sustainability is enhanced and empowered through
the creation of a network of non-competitive venues that wish to provide their visitors with rich
cultural experiences. The cross-visibility and sharing of digital content leads to a win–win situation.
In particular, smaller venues can be significantly benefited through their link to large, known ones, since
the reflection process can be supported by references to well-known artworks from the large venues.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: K.K., A.A. and M.L.-N.; data curation: A.D. and J.P.; investigation:
K.K., A.A., A.D., S.R.-M., M.B., S.G.-S., J.P., I.L., C.E.J. and M.L.-N.; methodology: A.A., S.R.-M., M.B., S.G.-S. and
C.E.J.; project administration: I.L.; resources: S.R.-M., M.B., S.G.-S. and J.P.; software: K.K., A.D., C.E.J. and M.L.-N.;
supervision: S.R.-M., M.B. and S.G.-S.; writing-original draft: K.K., A.A., A.D. and M.L.-N.; writing-review and
editing: S.R.-M., M.B., S.G.-S. and J.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No 693150. The authors from the University of Vigo got further support from the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the Galician Regional Government under agreement for funding the
AtlantTIC Research Center for Information and Communication Technologies, as well as the Ministerio de
Educación y Ciencia (Gobierno de España) research project TIN2017-87604-R.
Acknowledgments: We would like to acknowledge the contribution of the National Gallery Collections and
Information project authors, editors, reviewers and the National Gallery curators, in the production of the
CrossCult NG narratives.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
CH
DH
NG
ICT

Cultural Heritage
Digital Humanities
National Gallery
Information and Communication Technologies

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.

7.

Marstine, J. Routledge Companion to Museum Ethics Redefining Ethics for the Twenty-First Century Museum;
Routledge: Abingdon, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2011; p. 276, ISBN 1-280-68258-2.
Dümcke, C.; Gnedovsky, M. The Social and Economic Value of Cultural Heritage: Literature Review; EENC:
Chapel Hill, NC, USA, 2013.
Greffe, X. Concept study on the role of Cultural Heritage as the fourth pillar of Sustainable Development.
Venice Sustcult Proj. 2012, 1–73. Available online: http://docplayer.net/24195641-Concept-study-on-the-roleof-cultural-heritage-as-the-fourth-pillar-of-sustainable-development.html (accessed on 22 February 2020).
Ecorys; Associates, F. Economic Value of Ireland’s Historic Environment; Final report to the Heritage Council;
ECORYS: Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2012; 94p.
Young, J.O. The Ethics of Cultural Appropriation; Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, UK, 2009.
Kontiza, K.; Bikakis, A.; Miller, R. Cognitive-Based Visualization of Semantically Structured Cultural
Heritage Data. In Proceedings of the 14th International Semantic Web Conference, Bethlehem, PA, USA,
11–15 October 2015.
Vassilakis, C.; Poulopoulos, V.; Antoniou, A.; Wallace, M.; Lepouras, G.; López Nores, M. exhiSTORY: Smart
exhibits that tell their own stories. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2018, 81, 542–556. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

24 of 26

López-Nores, M.; Bravo-Quezada, O.G.; Bassani, M.; Antoniou, A.; Lykourentzou, I.; Jones, C.E.; Kontiza, K.;
Gonzalez-Soutelo, S.; Reboreda-Morillo, S.; Naudet, Y.; et al. Technology-Powered Strategies to Rethink
the Pedagogy of History and Cultural Heritage through Symmetries and Narratives. Symmetry 2019, 11, 22.
[CrossRef]
Antoniou, A. Social network profiling for cultural heritage: Combining data from direct and indirect
approaches. Soc. Netw. Anal. Min. 2017, 7, 1–11. [CrossRef]
Juniarta, N.; Couceiro, M.; Napoli, A.; Raïssi, C. Sequential Pattern Mining using FCA and Pattern Structures
for Analyzing Visitor Trajectories in a Museum. CLA 2018, 2018, 231–242.
Theodorakopoulos, M.; Papageorgopoulos, N.; Mourti, A.; Antoniou, A.; Wallace, M.; Lepouras, G.;
Vassilakis, C.; Platis, N. Personalized Augmented Reality Experiences in Museums using Google Cardboards.
In Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Semantic and Social Media Adaptation and
Personalization, Bratislava, Slovakia, 9–10 July 2017.
Falk, J.H.; Dierking, L.D. The Contextual Model of Learning. The Museum Experience Revisited; Routledge:
Abingdon, UK, 2012.
Jones, C.; Antoniou, A.; López-Nores, M.; Kontiza, K.; Schall, C.; Naudet, Y.; Deladiennée, L. Evaluation and
Best Practices Report; CrossCult Deliverable 5.3 Final version; Unpublished work, 2019.
Kontiza, K.; Loboda, O.; Deladiennee, L.; Castagnos, S.; Naudet, Y.
A Museum App to
Trigger Users’ Reflection.
2018.
Available online: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/f63b/
8016534c129076b5dd89d30eb637dc700047.pdf (accessed on 12 February 2020).
Bampatzia, S.; Bourlakos, I.; Antoniou, A.; Vassilakis, C.; Lepouras, G.; Wallace, M. Serious games: valuable
tools for cultural heritage. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Games and Learning Alliance,
Utrecht, The Netherlands, 5–7 December 2016; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 331–341.
Antoniou, A. Predicting Cognitive Profiles from a Mini Quiz: A Facebook Game for Cultural Heritage.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Games and Learning Alliance, Palermo, Italy, 5–7
December 2018; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 422–425.
Lambert, J. Digital Storytelling: Capturing Lives, Creating Community; Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2013.
Dunford, M.; Jenkins, T.E. Digital Storytelling: Form and Content; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017.
Falk, J.H. The use of time as a measure of visitor behavior and exhibit effectiveness. Roundtable Rep. 1982, 7,
10–13.
Davey, G. What is museum fatigue. Visit. Stud. Today 2005, 8, 17–21.
Falk, J.; Koran, J.; Dierking, L.; Dreblow, L. Predicting Visitor Behaviour. Curator 1985, 28, 4.
Weiler, B.; Walker, K. Enhancing the visitor experience: Reconceptualising the tour guide’s communicative
role. J. Hosp. Tour. Manag. 2014, 21, 90–99. [CrossRef]
Cosley, D.; Lewenstein, J.; Herman, A.; Holloway, J.; Baxter, J.; Nomura, S.; Gay, G. ArtLinks:fostering social
awareness and reflection in museums. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Florence, Italy, 5–10 April 2008; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2008; pp. 403–412.
Rounds, J. Strategies for the curiosity-driven museum visitor. Curator Mus. J. 2004, 47, 389–412. [CrossRef]
Ciolfi, L.; Bannon, L. Designing Interactive Museum Exhibits: Enhancing visitor curiosity through
augmented artefacts. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics,
Catania, Italy, 8–11 September 2002.
Di Pietro, L.; Guglielmetti Mugion, R.; Renzi, M.F.; Toni, M. An audience-centric approach for museums
sustainability. Sustainability 2014, 6, 5745–5762. [CrossRef]
Poulopoulos, V.; Vassilakis, C.; Antoniou, A.; Lepouras, G.; Theodoropoulos, A.; Wallace, M. The Personality
of the Influencers, the Characteristics of Qualitative Discussions and Their Analysis for Recommendations
to Cultural Institutions. Heritage 2018, 1, 239–253. [CrossRef]
Dahroug, A.; Aborizka, M.; López Nores, M.; Pazos Arias, J. A mobile app to explore cultural and historical
associations between Europe and the Arab and the Islamic worlds. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on ICT, Society and Human Beings, Porto, Portugal, 16–19 July 2019.
Daif, A.; Dahroug, A.; López-Nores, M.; González-Soutelo, S.; Bassani, M.; Antonio, A.; Gil-Solla, A.;
Ramos-Cabrer, M.; Pazos-Arias, J.J. A Mobile App to Learn About Cultural and Historical Associations in a
Closed Loop with Humanities Experts. Appl. Sci. 2019, 9, 9. [CrossRef]
Best, K. Making museum tours better: Understanding what a guided tour really is and what a tour guide
really does. Mus. Manag. Curatorship 2012, 27, 35–52. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

25 of 26

Bearman, D.; Geber, K. Transforming cultural heritage institutions through new media. Mus. Manag. Curatorship
2008, 23, 385–399. [CrossRef]
Linaza, M.T.; Eskudero, H.; Lamsfus, C.; Marcos, G. An authoring tool for interactive digital storytelling. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Virtual Reality and Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural
Heritage (vast’04), Oudenaarde, Belgium, 7–10 December 2004; Chrysanthou, Y., Cain, K., Silberman, N.,
Niccolucci, F., Eds.; Eurographics Association: Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, 2004; pp. 203–211. [CrossRef]
Lu, F.; Tian, F.; Jiang, Y.; Cao, X.; Luo, W.; Li, G.; Zhang, X.; Dai, G.; Wang, H. Creative and collaborative
digital storytelling inspired by cultural heritage. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI11), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 7–12 May 2011; ACM: New York, NY, USA,
2011; pp. 1919–1928. [CrossRef]
Lombardo, V.; Damiano, R. Storytelling on mobile devices for cultural heritage. New Rev. Hypermedia Multimed.
2012, 18, 11–35. [CrossRef]
Shin, J.; Park, H.; Woo, W. Connecting the Dots: Enhancing the Usability of Indexed Multimedia Data for
AR Cultural Heritage Applications through Storytelling. In Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop
on Content-Based Multimedia Indexing (CBMI), Florence, Italy, 19–21 June 2017; ACM: New York, NY, USA,
2017; p. 6. [CrossRef]
Vanoverschelde, F. No Story without a Backstory: The role and importance of the backstory in an augmented
reality application for cultural heritage. In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Narrative and
Hypertext (NHT19), Hof, Germany, 17 September 2019; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 1–3. [CrossRef]
Valtolina, S. A storytelling-driven framework for cultural heritage dissemination. Data Sci. Eng. 2016, 1,
114–123. [CrossRef]
Peters, C.; Braschler, M.; Clough, P. Multilingual Information Retrieval; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2012.
Tandon, A.; Slomska, A.; Opoku-Boateng, J.; Abbazia, D. Unlocking Sound and Image Heritage.
In Proceedings of the International SOIMA Conference, Brussels, Belgium, 3–4 September 2015.
Siegman, A. First Words: The World of Automated Storytelling. 2017.
Available online: https://
brainworldmagazine.com/first-words-the-world-of-automated-storytelling/ (accessed on 18 February 2020).
Hayles, N.K. Print Is Flat Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific Analysis. Poet. Today 2004, 25,
67–90. [CrossRef]
McLuhan, M. Understanding Media; Routledge: London, UK, 1964.
Crecente Maseda, M.; González Soutelo, S. (Eds.) 2000 años del Balneario de Lugo: Un Modelo de Activación del
Patrimonio Termal; Crecente Asociados: Lugo, Spain, 2016.
Carneiro, S. New data from the Roman healing spa of Aquae Flaviae (Chaves, Portugal). In Termalismo
Antiguo en Hispania: Un Análisis del Tejido Balneario en éPoca Romana y Tardorromana en la Península Ibérica;
Séiquer, G.M., Soutelo, S.G., Eds.; Anejos de Archivo Español de Arqueología 78; CSIC: Madrid, Spain, 2017;
pp. 65–94.
Bassani, M.; Bressan, M.; Ghedini, F. Aquae Patavinae. Il Termalismo Antico nel Comprensorio Euganeo e in
Italia. Atti del I Convegno Nazionale (Padova, 21–22 giugno 2010); Padova University Press: Padova, Italy, 2011;
Volume 21, pp. 1–296.
Bassani, M.; Bressan, M.; Ghedini, F. Montegrotto Terme e il termalismo in Italia. Aggiornamenti e nuove
prospettive di valorizzazione. In Atti del II Convegno Nazionale (Padova, 14–15 giugno 2011); Padova University
Press: Padova, Italy, 2012; Volume 26, pp. 1–424.
Bassani, M.; Bressan, M.; Ghedini, F. Aquae salutiferae. Il termalismo fra antico e contemporaneo. In Atti del
Convegno Internazionale (Montegrotto Terme, 6–8 Settembre 2012); Padova University Press: Padova, Italy, 2013;
Volume 29, pp. 1–449.
Annibaletto, M.; Bassani, M.; Ghedini, F. Cura, Preghiera e Benessere. Le Stazioni Curative Termominerali
Nell’Italia Antica; Padova University Press: Padova, Italy, 2014; Volume 31, pp. 1–336.
Kasas, S.; Struckman, R. Important Medical Centres in Antiquity—Epidaurus and Corinth–: When Medicine Was
Still Divine; Two Contributions to the Study of Ancient Medicine: (A) Some Medical Treatments in Ancient Corinth,
(b) Asklepios in Epidaurus; Editions Kasas: Athens, Greece, 1979.

Sustainability 2020, 12, 1666

50.

51.

52.
53.

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

26 of 26

Lambrinoudakis, V.K. Conservation and research: New evidence on a long-living cult. The sanctuary of
Apollo Maleatas and Asklepios at Epidauros. In Excavating Classical Culture. Recent Archaeological Discoveries
in Greece; Stamatopoulou, M., Yeroulanou, M., Eds.; BAR INternational Series 1031; Beazley: Oxford, UK,
2002; pp. 213–223.
López-Nores, M.; Kuflik, T.; Wallace, M.; Naudet, Y. Preface to the UMUAI special issue on personalized
delivery of cultural heritage content—Perspectives on 7 years of progress in the field. User Model. User
Adapt. Interact. 2019, 29, 1–7. [CrossRef]
Tozzi, C. Free Software and Free Culture: Open Source’s Influence on Society; Channel Futures: Pittsford, NY, USA, 2015.
Liapis, A.; López-Nores, M.; Gil-Solla, A.; Naudet, Y.; Lykourentzou, I.; Deladiennée, L.; Castagnos, S.;
Napoli, A.; Antoniou, A.; Platis, N.; et al. Identification of Technologies and Useful Software. CrossCult
Deliverable 3.1. Available online: http://www.crosscult.eu/en/resources/deliverables/ (accessed on
18 February 2020).
Eghbal, N. Roads and Bridges: The Unseen Labor Behind Our Digital Infrastructure; Ford Foundation: New York,
NY, USA, 2016.
Crichton, D. Open Source Sustainability; Tech Crunch: Bay Area, CA, USA, 2018.
O’Sullivan, J. We Need to Talk about the Digital Humanities Job; Talking Humanities:New York, NY, USA, 2018.
Bergvall-Kareborn, B.; Eriksson, C.I.; Staahlbröst, A.; Svensson, J. A Milieu for Innovation: Defining Living
Labs. In Proceedings of the 2nd ISPIM Innovation Symposium, New York, NY, USA, 6–9 Decmber 2009.
Bergvall-Kareborn, B.; Stahlbrost, A. Living Lab: An open and citizen-centric approach for innovation. IJIRD
2009, 1, 356–370. [CrossRef]
Vlachidis, A.; Bikakis, A.; Kyriaki-Manessi, D.; Triantafyllou, I.; Antoniou, A. The CrossCult Knowledge
Base. A Co-inhabitant of Cultural Heritage Ontology and Vocabulary. In Advances in Databases and
Information Systems 2017: New Trends in Databases and Information Systems; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017;
pp. 353–362.
Vlachidis, A.; Bikakis, A.; Kyriaki-Manessi, D.; Triantafyllou, I.; Padfield, J.; Kontiza, K. Semantic
Representation and Enrichment of Cultural Heritage Information for Fostering Reinterpretation and
Reflection on the European History. In Proceedings of the Digital Cultural Heritage: Final Conference
of the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Initial Training Network for Digital Cultural Heritage, ITN-DCH 2017,
Olimje, Slovenia, 23–25 May 2017; Ioannides, M., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 99–103.
Padfield, J.; Kontiza, K.; Bikakis, A.; Vlachidis, A. Semantic Representation and Location Provenance of
Cultural Heritage Information: The National Gallery Collection in London. Heritage 2019, 2, 648–665.
[CrossRef]
Wilkinson, M.D.; Dumontier, M.; Aalbersberg, I.J.; Appleton, G.; Axton, M.; Baak, A.; Blomberg, N. The FAIR
Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Sci. Data 2016, 3, 1–9. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Shepherd, R.; Padfield, J.; Tice, R. Opening Up the National Gallery’s Collection Information; Museums+Tech:
London, UK, 2019.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

