The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

POINT CLOUD-BASED SURVEY FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE.
AN EXPERIENCE OF INTEGRATED USE OF RANGE-BASED AND IMAGE-BASED
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE SAN FRANCESCO CONVENT IN MONTERUBBIANO
Alessandra Meschini a, Enrica Petrucci a, Daniele Rossi a, Filippo Sicuranza a
a

UNICAM, School of Architecture and Design, Viale della Rimembranza, Ascoli Piceno, Italy,
alessandra.meschini@unicam.it
Commission V

KEY WORDS: SFM, TOF laser scanning, UAV, 3D data integration,
ABSTRACT:
The paper aims at presenting some results of a point cloud-based survey carried out through integrated methodologies based on
active and passive 3D acquisition techniques for processing 3D models. This experiment is part of a research project still in progress
conducted by an interdisciplinary team from the School of Architecture and Design of Ascoli Piceno and funded by the University of
Camerino. We describe an experimentation conducted on the convent of San Francesco located in Monterubbiano town center
(Marche, Italy). The whole complex has undergone a number of substantial changes since the year of its foundation in 1247. The
survey was based on an approach blending range-based 3D data acquired by a TOF laser scanner and image-based 3D acquired using
an UAV equipped with digital camera in order to survey some external parts difficult to reach with TLS. The integration of two
acquisition methods aimed to define a workflow suitable to process dense 3D models from which to generate high poly and low poly
3D models useful to describe complex architectures for different purposes such as photorealistic representations, historical
documentation, risk assessment analyses based on Finite Element Methods (FEM).
1. INTRODUCTION
This experiment is part of a research project that is still in
progress (PRO-CULT: A PRObabilistic performance-based
methodology for seismic risk assessment of CULTural
heritage). It is being carried out by an interdisciplinary team
from the School of Architecture and Design in Ascoli Piceno,
and is funded by the University of Camerino. The people
involved in this project come from different fields —
seismology,
probability
theory,
structural
dynamics,
architectural history, rehabilitation and survey — since risk
assessment, which represents the main topic of this research, is
typically an interdisciplinary topic.
One of the main objectives of this research was the development
of an accurate 3D model that could be used for different
purposes, such as the photorealistic representation of the current
state in order to historically document the convent of San
Francesco in Moterubbiano (Marche, Italy), not only as
documentation to conserve and enhance the cultural heritage but
also as representations to be further developed, for example, for
risk assessment analyses based on Finite Element Methods
(FEM) with the aim of investigating the building structure and
consequently assessing possible earthquake damage, especially
in seismically active areas such as the Marche Region.

performance of each sensor. (Remondino 2011) (Fiorillo et al.
2013)
As for the capture of 3D data pertaining to the architecturalcultural heritage the use of aerial photogrammetry is combined
with and often completes surveying sessions based on TLS
(Remondino 2011). For this purpose high-resolution digital
cameras mounted on unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) allow
impossible points of view to be reached with TLS from adjacent
buildings or appropriately placed light scaffolding. While
scientific literature in the field of TLS is wide and exhaustive,
possibilities regarding the use of UAVs equipped with cameras
or even light TOF laser scanners have still not been fully
verified (Colomina 2013).
UAVs represent one of the emerging technologies in
photogrammetry. This technology is suitable to innumerable
applications such as TV and film recording, the maintenance of
infrastructures. There are also many uses for surveillance and
control vast areas, as well as surveying the topography or
individual architectural constructions (Colomina 2013).
2. CASE STUDY
2.1 Historical background

With this goal, once we had analysed the volumes of the
Convent and in particular the position that it occupies at the
downtown of Monterubbiano, separate from other adjacent
buildings only by narrow passageways, we decided to integrate
two reality-based capture methods in order to achieve dense 3D
models from which we could generate high- and low-poly-3D
models. A point-cloud-based survey carried out through
integrated methodologies is presented in order to develop a
hybrid workflow combining the advantages and best

The case study is the small convent of San Francesco situated
on the highest part of Monterubbiano (Province of Fermo,
Marche, Italy). The ridge sits above the Aso River, part of the
mountainous comb structure that reaches the Adriatic Sea after
marking the territory.
Many historic towns can be seen along the river valley. The
different settlements, each with its own particularities, present
common characteristics: a very compact urban fabric
surrounded by walls that have been more or less conserved over

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

413

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

the centuries, traversed by paths running between the houses
and opening in the squares in front of city buildings and
monasteries.
Monterubbiano is characterised by a variety of interesting
architecture. The Franciscan complex is among the most
representative buildings in the old city. The Church of San
Francesco with its cloister dates from 1247, between the
domination of Fermo and the birth of the cities. The church was
modified in 1428 when the wooden trusses of the roof were
demolished and substituted with the current brick vaults. At the
beginning of the 17th century, the orientation of the church was
inverted, with an entrance placed on the apse side and the altar
on the old face where the signs of an upper opening (rose or
arched window) are still visible; the date 1622 is inscribed
above the entablature of the current entrance. The original bell
tower, which was leaning, was demolished at the end of the
18th century and substituted with the current one. The convent,
on the other hand, has undergone various transformations and
adaptations, maintaining only a few hints of the original
construction, among which are some of the arches in the
cloister. The complex is currently used as a museum, which
includes an auditorium for shows and meetings. The
Archaeological Museum is dedicated in part to the history and
archaeology of the Aso River Valley and in part to the
archaeological discoveries made over the course of the 19th and
20th centuries. The museum also houses a library, which
contains around 45,000 volumes, and the “Giano” Centre for
Environmental Education, instituted by the Marche Region in
2001.
2.2 Architectural Complex Description
Beginning in 1247, when the Complex was founded, until the
most recent restorations following the earthquake that hit the
area in 1997 were finished in 2007, the entire San Francesco
complex has not only changed in its use (a minor prison starting
in 1861, a grain storehouse during the Fascist period, a
woodworking shop, and recently taken over by the city for
cultural activities), but has also undergone a series of substantial
formal modifications that have defined its current structure
consisting of different architectural elements, all of which are
juxtaposed and connected to form a single, complex
architecture.
The following external characteristics are found in the San
Francesco complex:
•
it is located on a promontory (the highest point of the
historical centre) and is accessible either from the façade of the
church, which is located at the top of a system of stairs that
draws attention to a considerable change in elevation with
respect to the road in front (Figure 1), or from the right side
(commonly used access), which can be reached via a very steep
road;
•
the free access space around the Complex cannot be
assigned to a single plane, but rather presents an elevation
profile with notable height differences and in some particular
points (the bell tower), also a very reduced width;
•
the walls are mainly in bare brick save one part of the
southern wall of the church which shows a mixture of brick and
square stone (probably Istrian stone);

Figure 1. Front of the church with the monumental staircase
•
the surrounding construction follows the orography,
which means the structures meet the ground at very different
elevations; some are even much lower than the level of the San
Francesco complex.
Internally, the church and convent present the following aspects
from the organisational and distributional points of view:
•
the church, choir, and bell-tower base form a single body,
the main body of the monastic Complex;
•
the church, which is the main element, consists of a single
nave covered by Gothic groin vaults resting on bare brick
columns; there are diverse decorative elements on the side
walls such as altars, traces of frescoes, and plaster;
•
the choir, covered by a groin vault with raised ribs, is
situated at a higher level on the counter-façade (the part inside
the entrance), therefore exhibiting a double level facing the nave
of the church;
•
the tall, soaring bell tower is located to the left of the
church entrance. At the nave level of the church, the base of the
tower is composed of a small environment located slightly off
the ground and covered by a barrel vault in bare brick, while the
floor is in clay. At the level of the choir, a C-shaped scale can
be accessed, which, in a reduced space, allows a higher
elevation of the bell tower to be reached;
•
what remains of the adjacent cloister is composed of a
sequence of groin vaults on two sides, of which only one is still
an open portico. The court is currently marred by a tank for
drinking water;
•
on the left-hand side of the church (north side) there are
many rooms all linked together but placed at different levels,
thus generating a complex spatial organization. The roofing

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

414

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

systems of such rooms are varied: sexpartite vaults, cloister
vaults, buttresses, and lunettes, along with flat ceilings and
wooden trusses;
•
finally, another interesting element is the underground
cavities, galleries, and tunnels. The presence of environments
carved out of the ground is a characteristic found in many
historical town centres in the Marche Region. They are spaces
that have been used over the centuries for different purposes
such as water cisterns and wells, areas for living and conserving
food, defensive areas, religious and burial spaces, pits to extract
materials for construction, and factories to process agricultural
products.
3. DATA-CAPTURE METHODOLOGY
This part of the article illustrates the main phases of the project
workflow, in which the design and experimentation of an
appropriate “survey project” obviously form the first crucial
step. This phase serves to consider the objectives, critical
aspects, and choices adopted considering the instruments used.
Such a description is also directed at identifying a methodology
that can be used in other similar cases.
Given the area in which the survey described here was carried
out and the skills involved (architects, structural engineers,
historians, and restoration experts), the general objective was to
provide careful documentation and a representation of the
current state of the San Francesco Complex to be used for
multiple aims, such as: i) an overall reading of the entire
building and its arrangement; ii) understanding and analysis of
the structural system derived from the superposition of
historical modifications that, in the context of the project, can
help to interpret its behaviour over time; iii) analysis aimed at
monitoring and managing the site; and iv) research to verify the
historical phases by integrating and comparing the survey to
archival sources in order to identify the traces and stratifications
that have occurred over time.

Once the objectives were clarified, the level of detail of the
models identified, the possible critical on-site aspects
considered along with the overall characteristics of the building
and the site described in the preceding section, a point-cloudbased surveying campaign was undertaken using an approach
capable of integrating terrestrial range-based data acquired
using TOF laser scanners with aerial photogrammetry using a
UAV equipped with a remote-oriented camera.
The methodology for data capture was also selected based on
the case study, that is, on the particular position related to the
geomorphological structure of the site so that each of the chosen
technologies could provide information where another presented
“gaps”. Essentially, while the laser scanner could control
possible areas hidden from below, the use of photography using
the UAV allowed zones hidden from above to be controlled and
also to photograph considerably high parts (roofing and the bell
tower).
The same high-resolution photographs would be used to
texturise the entire 3D model, in order to increase the level of
representative realism and to improve the quality of detail
where 3D data would not be capable of describing the exact
geometry.
As is obvious, because a database composed of point clouds
was elaborated, it was also important to be able to use SFM
tools to generate point clouds from the photographs. For this
reason, an approach capable of integrating data from the laser
scanner and images captured with the UAV represented the best
solution for our goals. The combination of such instruments,
which produce homogeneous data (point clouds), allowed them
to be fused together, creating a redundancy of 3D information,
which could then provide information for different uses with
different levels of detail. (Figure 2)

3.1 Planning the integrated survey
Considering that surveying is an activity aimed at collecting
geometrical, spatial, and material information, it is necessary to
provide for and establish the maximum level of detail desired
from the subsequent representations. Coordinated work between
the skills involved therefore identified an accuracy (metric
precision) of data capture in order to then obtain further
modelling at more detailed levels in a scale interval from 1:50
to 1:20 according to the dimension/object of the depiction.
After this, an in-depth survey was made to make preliminary
observations of the dimension and overall shape of the
architectural structure and the morphological characteristics of
the site, as well as the meteorological/environmental conditions
and/or the presence of elements of physical obstruction around
the building. This essentially dealt with a careful and, where
possible, exhaustive evaluation of the different factors that can
influence, sometimes profoundly, the quality of the data
acquired in order to define: i) methodologies and instruments
that are more adapted to surveying; and ii) correct planning of
the data-capture phase in terms of both the quality of
information and the time and resources used.

Figure 2. Survey flow-chart
The survey campaign, conducted in February 2014, was
undertaken in two phases separated by about two weeks. Such a
time lapse prevented us from using a target network placed on
the ground and along the building perimeter, which would have
simplified and improved the accuracy in recording the point
clouds obtained from different types of data-capture
instruments.
The first surveying session dedicated to photography using the
UAV took place in one morning; the second, dedicated to 3D
laser scanner data acquisition, took place over four days full of
field work.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

415

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

Figure 3. Merged point cloud from TOF scanner
3.2 3D Laser Scanning
The range-based survey was made using a Leica P20 TOF laser
scanner. Laser scanner technology was used for 3D geometrical
data acquisition both inside and outside the San Francesco
Complex. Given the principal characteristics of the specific
instrument and the architectural construction, the survey was
designed to use a multi-resolution approach. Different scanning
layouts (sampling densities) were used in relation to the level of
detail and geometrical complexity of the parts surveyed and as a
function of the working distances from the surfaces to be
scanned. In particular, for the inside, with scanning station
positions less than 10 m from the part of the wall to be
surveyed, a resolution of 12.5 mm at 10 m was fixed. Different
resolutions were used for the exterior:
• 6.3 mm at 10 m (for data acquisition at distances between
10 and 20 m from the external surfaces with a scanning time of
1 min 49 s);
• 12.5 mm at 10 m (in cases where the surrounding site
conditions constrained working distances to less than 10 m from
the surface);
• 3.2 mm at 10 m (for scans that involved the high bell
tower).
For such a set of resolutions, the times used for the individual
scans ranged from a minimum of 58 s to a maximum of 3.5 min.
Each scan was made covering an area of 360°x270°. In defining
the external scan position, the possibility of acquiring part of the
morphological site was considered along with the elevation
profile of the streets in the immediate vicinity of the object of
study.
The 3D digitising campaign was completed with a total of 83
scans, of which 26 were external and 57 were related to internal
environments (Figure 3).

Figure 4. The ogival vault system inside the church
The possibility of designing the survey to acquire wide common
surface areas (between the different internal environments, the
external walls, and the interior and exterior with scans
positioned on the openings) allowed us to use the cloud-tocloud recording method, permitting the scans to be connected
together (Figure 4). For the exterior, the distances between the
scanning stations were different based on the conditions of the
context, but anyway guaranteed the superposition of partial
point clouds.
The entire data set acquired was 421 million points. To manage
and share this enormous amount of data with the other subjects
involved (engineers, restorers, etc.), a platform equipped with
the TruView visualisation plug-in was set up to share the 3D
data both on-line and off-line. The platform included all the
point clouds acquired with the aim of effortlessly exploring both
the entirety of all the aligned point clouds datasets recorded
with indications of all the scan positions and all the different
scans made.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

416

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

3.3 UAV Data Capture
Regarding the image-based survey, photography via UAV was
necessary to capture not only the textures, but especially
building geometries not reachable with the laser scanner, such
as the roof and the bell tower, which is richly decorated with
mouldings that were inevitably under shadow in the laser
scanner data. This method allowed us to experiment and test
data-capture techniques with the UAV for photogrammetry
applications. In Italy, low-altitude flights with such aerial
vehicles is not currently regulated with precise legislation, but
there are some under study that will shortly limit their use based
on different aims of the flights (recreation- or job-based).

encountered during flight, so the flight paths were carefully
studied during planning to keep the drone always in view and
also to identify areas to facilitate take-offs and landings.

Figure 6. The UAV flying around the convent
The entire photography campaign was made using a Sony NEX5R camera with a fixed focal length of 22 mm and an APS-C
sensor (23.4 x 15.6 mm) with a maximum resolution of 4912 x
3264 (16,032,768 pixels), yielding a physical pixel dimension
of 0.004763 mm (p = 23.4mm/4912).

Figure 5. UAV used for surveying
In planning the surveying operations, the choice of this
instrument required some preliminary evaluation pertaining to
the site conditions, both from the elevation and
geomorphological points of view and regarding the
meteorological aspects (the direction and speed of the wind) and
lighting conditions.
While not at an excessive altitude (463 m above sea level), the
location of the San Francesco convent within the historical
centre of Monterubbiano is at the highest point and completely
open towards the Aso Valley, so it is very exposed to wind. As
for the lighting conditions, the important factor is the need to
avoid sharp shadows and marked radiometric differences within
the sequence of images to be taken. For this reason, the weather
forecast was studied ad hoc to find a day with low wind speed
that possibly overcast but where the cloud cover was high
enough that it would not rain.
The aerial vehicle used had 6 15”-diameter rotors and was
powered by 6-400 kV brushless electric motors, with 2-22 V 5A
LiPo batteries connected in parallel. The control unit was
composed of 3 gyroscopes, 3 accelerometers, a magnetometer, a
barometer, and a GPS. It was 80 cm in diameter and 40 cm
high, with a total weight (without camera) of 7 kg and a
maximum carrying capacity of 2.5 kg. The duration of each
flight with charged batteries was 8 min, and the speed ranged
from 0 to 10 m/s (Figure 5) (Figure 6) .
These characteristics were kept in mind while planning the
survey since they determine the distinctive aerodynamic
capabilities and control of the flight paths of these aerial
vehicles. It was also considered how the current configuration
ignored the existing physical obstacles that could be

The camera had been previously calibrated with the use of a
grid of 4 coded targets provided by the Photomodeler software.
Knowing the camera characteristics used in relation to the
characteristics of the object to be photographed is fundamental
in planning the survey campaign. The focal length, for example,
influences the ideal number of images to take and thus the
resolution of the final point cloud. In order to assess the means
of image-taking in advance, that is, the distribution of images
required to cover the entire surface of the building and the
shaded zones as much as possible, the main rules of shooting
required by the software used in the subsequent elaboration
(orientation) of the images (minimum overlay, convergence,
etc.) were considered.
Therefore, considering all of these details, four flights were
made after identifying additional take-off/landing areas, one for
each approachable face of the architectural Complex.
Considering the time needed for take-off and landing, moving
in the take-off areas identified, substituting the batteries, as well
as the length of each flight, the entire photographic survey
campaign lasted about an hour and a half.
Each flight was made manually (without set automation) and at
a low, variable speed. The flight paths were primarily linear
(horizontal and vertical motion) except around the bell tower,
where the motion approximated circular motion in several
different horizontal planes. Consequently, even the height of the
flights was necessarily varied.
A total of 517 images were taken with a point of view that
varied as a function of the building conditions surrounding the
architectural Complex. The position of the camera on the
aircraft was set to be able to take images that were inclined with
respect to the building’s vertical surface (to view the shaded
areas from above). The shooting frequency was one every two
seconds, while the speed of the drone, although low, was not
exactly constant, so the superposition between adjacent photos
wound up ranging from 60 to 80%, which was, however,
enough to extract coherent 3D information.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

417

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

Figure 7. Colored point cloud and marked position of all the pictures taken from the UAV
4. DATA PROCESSING
The UAV campaign produced 517 photographs in RAW and
JPG format. From a first look at the lighting conditions of all of
the photographs, we chose to use the JPG images directly
without corrections via RAW processing. We then proceeded to
qualitatively analyse the photographs, discarding about 310
because they were blurry. Of the remaining images, 129 were
selected based on the quality and coverage of the subject. The
129 images, in which radial distortions were eliminated using
Photomodeler, were processed with Photoscan in order to obtain
a dense points cloud.
The next step was to orient the photographs. Analysing the
sparse point cloud obtained through orientation, some notable
zones presented points that moved away from the model
significantly in the processing phase. Using to such points, it
was possible to identify further problematic (blurry) images.
Such images were eliminated from the processing, reducing the
total to 93 photographs.
Once the 93 photos were oriented and no alignment errors were
found, extraction of the dense point cloud was started with the
“high” setting. Once the point cloud was obtained and cleaned
of all outliers and points not pertaining to the subject of interest,
a total of 39 million points (38,959,834) remained (Figure 7).
Parallel to this, processing of the point cloud obtained from the
laser scanner campaign was undertaken. The external stations
(26) were united and decimated, retaining one point every
centimetre. In order to align the point clouds from the two
campaigns, it was necessary to scale the point cloud produced
by processing images taken by the drone.
We then proceeded to identify a reference length for both point
clouds (Figure 8).

Figure 8. The red line used as a references lenght to align the
point clouds captured from UAV (a) and TLS (b)

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

418

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

Figure 10. (a) Scanner data and hole boundaries highlighted; (b)
hole boundaries extracted; (c) hole boundaries projected on
UAV data; (d) selection of overlapping areas on UAV data
using projected boundaries; (e) UAV data fitting scanner data
holes; (f) scanner data merged with UAV data.

Figure 9. Deviation analysis of a detail of the complex
The extreme points of the straight line were identified near
corners of the building (unaligned, distant enough, and visible
to both systems).
Alignment was made using Geomagic Studio software. Such a
program allows for a best-fit alignment only between one mesh
and one point cloud. Since it was not possible to align two point
clouds automatically, the point cloud coming from the scanner
was tessellated using the proprietary meshing Wrap algorithm
in Geomagic, which is better adapted to reconstructing
architectural constructions than other meshing algorithms
(Poisson, for example), which would have generated a model
with corners that were too soft and smoothed.

Once alignment using the best fit was made, an additional
adjustment was made to decrease the deviation between the two
point clouds. The average resulting deviation was 3.9 cm.
To better establish and verify the accuracy of the alignment,
different parts of the model were analysed using complete data
from the two point clouds without applying any decimation
(Figure 9).
Once the models were aligned, the merging phase was started.
The laser scanner data were left unchanged while all the
superimposed parts of the drone point cloud were eliminated,
leaving only the parts necessary to fill in the scanner point cloud
gaps. Such a procedure allowed a complete model of the
coverage to be obtained, which was almost completely absent in
the laser scanner data.
Division of the drone point cloud into parts in order to merge it
with the scanner model and parts to be eliminated was done by

Figure 11. 3D model obtained using wrap method in Geomagic

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

419

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XL-5, 2014
ISPRS Technical Commission V Symposium, 23 – 25 June 2014, Riva del Garda, Italy

identifying the gap edges on the mesh derived from the laser
scanner. The contours were converted into curves, which were
then transferred to the mesh derived from the drone data.
This allowed us to use the curves as a boundary to eliminate the
extra parts, i.e., those overlaying the scanner data.
Such a procedure allowed a complete model of the roof to be
obtained, which was almost entirely absent from the laser
scanner data (Figure 10).
The 3D model obtained, which was free of textures, was used
by the team of engineers dedicated to structural verifications to
analyse the layout of the building, identify the main volumes,
and plan the ideal level of detail to undertake structural analysis.
4.1 Future Work
Based on such analysis and observations, a later phase of the
research will concentrate on a simplified 3D model composed
of surfaces that describe the building in its main areas, but
which is useful for processing in an FEM analysis.
The 3D model will be texturized by projecting on it the highresolution photo obtained by the photographic equipment
mounted on the drone.
This phase will have different approaches and workflows
according to the level of detail desired:
• to texturize the complete 3D model for use in overall views
(3D pdf, 3D on-line player, etc.), a mesh will be used with a low
number of polygons on which the aerial photos will be
projected and blended using orientations of the photographs
obtained using SFM technique;
• to generate orthographic images, which will be useful to
restorer or historian for wall-material analysis or for the
definition of crack patterns, portions of a non-decimated 3D
model will be used, onto which both the aerial and terrestrial
photographs will be projected (Figure 11).
In this case, the projection of the photographs will be made
using specific 3D-studio-type software tools (Autodesk 3ds
Max). In such a software environment, the photographs oriented
using SFM technique will be projected making use of ad hoc
scripts aimed at automating procedures to import the
viewpoints, material generation for photograph projection, and
rendering. Regarding the land-based photographs, for we have
no information on the position and orientation with respect to
the 3D model, these will be positioned given some reference
measurements on the three spatial axes both on the 3D model
and the photographs through utilities such as “camera match” in
3ds Max, which, recognising homologous points, allows the 3D
model and photographs to be aligned.

Figure 11. Orthogonal projection of 3D model with rough
textures
research, models textured with aerial images, with different
levels of detail useful for different analysis by the members of
the team of scholars involved in the experimentation (architects,
structural engineers, restorers, historians). Such analysis will
allow us to evaluate all the phases of our approach (data capture
and data processing) in relation to the quality of the results
obtained.
REFERENCES
Beraldin A., 2004, Integration of laser scanning and closerange photogrammetry - The last decade and beyond.
International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
(ISPRS) Congress, Commission VII, Istanbul, Turkey. 2004 pp.
972-983.
Colomina I. and Molina P., 2013. Unmanned aerial systems for
photogrammetry and remote sensing: A review. ISPRS Journal
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 92 pp 79–97
El-Hakim, S. F., Beraldin, J. A., Picard, M., and Godin G.,
2004, Detailed 3D reconstruction of large-scale heritage sites
with integrated Techniques, IEEE Computer Graphics and
Application, 24(3), 2004, pp. 21-29.
Fiorillo, F., Jiménez, B., Remondino, F., Barba, S., 2012. 3D
surveying and modeling of the archaeological area of Paestum,
Italy. Virtual Archaeol. Rev. 4, 55–60.
Guidi, G., Russo, M., and Beraldin J-A., Acquisizione e
modellazione poligonale, Ed. McGraw Hill, 2010.

5. CONCLUSION
The goal of this research was to test a workflow to define a
methodology for surveying, processing and representing the
Convent of San Francesco in Monterubbiano (Marche, Italy),
useful also for similar architectural complex.
The survey was based on the integration of 3D data coming
from a terrestrial TOF laser scanner and photographs taken by
UAV. These images permitted us to record parts of the building
can not be reached by terrestrial laser scanners. The aerial
images were then processed with SFM techniques in order to
obtain a points cloud. In a further phase this points cloud was
aligned and merged with the points cloud captured by the TOF
laser scanner.
This cloud to cloud process data has allowed the construction of
a dense 3D model from which to derive, in a future phase of the

Micoli, L., Guidi, G., Angheleddu, D., Russo, M., 2013
A multidisciplinary approach to 3D survey and reconstruction
of historical buildings, Digital Heritage International Congress
(DigitalHeritage) proceedings, 2013, Volume: 2, pp. 241 - 248
Remondino, F., 2011. Heritage recording and 3D modeling
with photogrammetry and 3D scanning. Remote Sens. 3, pp.
1104–1138.
Saleri, R., Cappellini V., Nony, N., De Luca, PierrotDeseillingy, M., Bardiere, E., Campi,
M., 2013, UAV
Photogrammetry for archaeological survey: The Theaters area
of Pompeii Digital Heritage International Congress
(DigitalHeritage) proceedings, 2013, Volume: 2, pp. 497 - 502

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
doi:10.5194/isprsarchives-XL-5-413-2014

420

