Smart Environments and their
Applications to Cultural Heritage
Nick Ryan

Tullio Salmon Cinotti

Giuseppe Raffa

Computing Laboratory
University of Kent
Canterbury, CT2 7NF, UK
+441227827699

ARCES - University of Bologna
Via Toffano 2/2
40125-Bologna-ITALY
+390512095421

ARCES - University of Bologna
Via Toffano 2/2
40125-Bologna-ITALY
+390512095421

n.s.ryan@kent.ac.uk

tsalmon@arces.unibo.it

graffa@arces.unibo.it

SUMMARY
Cultural and natural heritage applications have proved to be an
attractive vehicle for ubicomp researchers. Several projects
have developed data collection tools, museum or city visitor
guides as a means of demonstrating various concepts including
location and context awareness and smart building
environments. Together, these represent two ends of the
‘production’ process of bringing cultural and natural heritage
from the research environment to its consumers. The
intermediate analytical, archival and curatorial stages are less
well represented, but also provide considerable scope for
ubicomp research.
The workshop invited researchers and practitioners from the
ubicomp and heritage communities to share their experience, to
envision future directions beyond existing demonstrators, and to
examine directions towards deployable and interoperable
systems. This volume presents the ten best papers received.
They address many classes of ambient: touristic routes, cities,
parks, archaeological sites, ancient buildings, and museums.
They address the issue of using ambient intelligence to extend
the users perception level, their learning abilities or their
productivity; in fact the user is not only the information
consumer but also the producer, as shown, for example in the
papers on growing tour guides and on collecting context tagged
data. Most are not focused on technology; rather they
concentrate on its application, and they envisage strong support
from the ambient intelligence in simplifying the interfaces (Bay,
Garzotto, Ghosh, Jung, Li-Wei, Roffia) and in creating
innovative services, and new expectations for the users
(Sklenar, Niu). Or they describe approaches and propose ideas
to understand the environment and its past (Malkin, Sukigara).
One paper addresses the design of applications to be run in
smart environments and provide guidelines for moving
Multimedia Cultural Applications from Stationary to Mobile
Location-Aware Devices (Garzotto).
Many papers show how to tailor information access and
presentation to a user location recognized from various sets of
sensors, but there is also one paper (Niu) that shows how to
tailor information with respect to user preferences and interests,
through the generation of personalized guided tours based on
dynamic ontologies; this is an interesting research area that can
boost the power of smart environments not only in the cultural
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Smart Environments and Their Applications to Cultural Heritage,
UbiComp’05, September 11–14, 2005, Tokyo, Japan.

heritage domain.
The authors originate from many parts of the world, including
Africa, Australia, United States, Asia (Japan, Korea, Republic
of China, India), and Europe (Belgium, Italy, Switzerland and
UK), and, most important of all, they let us envisage a clear
short and medium term research path towards the application of
smart environments in the creation, management and
dissemination of cultural and natural heritage. Such a path is
strongly interdisciplinary, and this must be understood by the
research planners: unfortunately, while the scientific committee
of this workshop includes in the same percentage experts in
technology, humanities and cultural heritage communication,
most of the papers come only from Science and Technology
institutions. However, the committee feels that a ubicomp
research community and a market focused on the applications of
smart environments to cultural heritage are emerging and
intends to invite to the next events experts in the economics of
cultural heritage and tourism.

Keywords
Smart Environments, Ubiquitous Computing, Context
Management, Cultural and natural heritage, Sensors, HumanComputer
Interaction,
Data
Acquisition,
Collection
Management, Visitor Guides, Education, Edutainment.

1. BACKGROUND
The research area variously known as Ubiquitous Computing,
Pervasive Computing or Ambient Intelligence derives much of
its inspiration from Weiser’s vision [1] of a third age of
computing beyond the current ‘Personal Computing’ paradigm
and the growth of the Internet. The vision is characterised by
the ubiquitous presence of networked computing devices, on
the person, in vehicles, in the fabric of buildings, in consumer
products, etc. We are already some way towards this with
embedded processors and mobile phones greatly outnumbering
conventional computing devices but, in our present
environment, only a minority of these devices are networked
and even fewer are more than minimally interoperable. In this
imagined future, we will interact directly with only a small
proportion of the devices around us. Unlike today, where the
computer is often the centre of attraction, many of these devices
will be peripheral and will disappear into the environment
where they will provide information, services and control
functions as and when they are needed. In the ubiquitous
paradigm, a personal computing environment should be truly
personal in that it accompanies the individual wherever they go
and whatever they are doing. It should not, however, be limited
to the capabilities of our conventional desktop or laptop
machines. Instead, it should also be able to adapt to its
immediate environment and to make use of location specific
services. Equally, the environment should be able to adapt to its

occupants by offering services that most closely correlate with
their needs.
For many reasons, applications in the domains of cultural
heritage have proved to be especially popular amongst ubicomp
researchers for demonstrating innovative ideas. Amongst these
reasons are the inherent mobility of potential users, a wide
diversity of attractive materials for presentation, and the
potentials of tourism and associated markets.

2. UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING,
CULTURAL HERITAGE AND
UBICOMP05
To date, most demonstrator applications in the cultural and
natural heritage areas have concentrated on data collection
systems and on various forms of visitor guides. These have
been seen as obvious applications of context-aware and, more
specifically, location aware technologies.
Location-awareness has been an especially popular subarea of
context-awareness. The technologies used are mainly shortrange infrared, ultrasonic or radio signals for indoor
applications, such as museum guides [2], [3]. Outdoors, Global
Positioning System (GPS) receivers have been widely used for
data collection [4] and urban visitor guides [5]. Some of the
Workshop papers investigate these and also alternative
solutions. Bay, for example, uses computer vision techniques to
precisely locate the spotted object and to access related
multimedia contents. We suggest that such precise location and
orientation information provided by image analysis can be used
in multisensor location systems to periodically correct
accumulated position errors.
Many examples using location as a key aspect of context
illustrate the idea of smart environments in which information
and services applicable to immediate local needs are
emphasised. In most cases, the locations of interest are typically
those of the mobile user and of static exhibits and structures.
The location of portable artifacts has received less attention, but
there is clearly scope for applications that support the specialist
analysis of collected data, and the management of museum
collections.
A key ingredient in building context and location-aware
services for smart environments is an infrastructure for
managing and disseminating contextual information. We can
now envisage the deployment of infrastructure support for the
full spectrum of activities from initial data collection, through
the essential analytical, archival and curatorial stages, to the end
products of public and scholarly presentation, education and
edutainment.
Applications need not be restricted to an individual museum or
visitor site. The concept of ‘cultural routes’ (recently introduced
by Neil Silberman and Daniel Pletinckx of the Ename Center
for Public Archaeology and Heritage Presentation, Ename,
Belgium) seeks to bring together related attractions within a
region and to offer thematic routes that would be attractive to
individuals and family groups pursuing self-organised
vacations. This, in turn, adds complexity to location models,
and suggests a link with more conventional navigational tools.
This wider range of scales brings with it a need for careful
consideration of established ubicomp concerns, including:
1.
2.
3.

networking and communications
the suitability of different devices for use in a range of
situations
interoperability of devices and infrastructures

4. support for tool building
5. support for content authoring
6. and, of course, personal privacy .
Position papers addressing these and related themes were
invited to the Workshop.
It turned out that, with the exception of the support for tools
building (Bay, Li-Wei, Jung), none of the above mentioned
system issues was directly considered by the authors. Most of
them, instead, focused on their own application or on design
methodologies, while the technology was mostly taken for
granted, as pointed out by many of the scientific committee
reviews.
The papers are therefore subdivided in the following sections:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Building context related knowledge bases
Methodologies for embedding contextual knowledge
in mobile applications
Location and orientation subsystems
Ambient intelligence for outdoor cultural experiences

2.1 Building context-related knowledge
bases
The main benefit of smart environments in cultural heritage
applications is to increase the effectiveness of information
access and presentation thanks to the knowledge of the user’s
context provided by the smart environment itself. This implies
that a comprehensive context-related knowledge base exists.
Therefore there must exist proper methods to build such
context-related databases and to make them smoothly available
to the users. Two workshop papers are focused on this issue:
Sklenar relies on today’s nearly global location awareness and
connectivity to provide smart guide users with a means (i.e. a
dedicated simple interface) to contribute to the knowledge base
by adding new point of interest, and related metadata, such as
location, description, and preferences of the potentially
interested users.
Sklenar points out that such a simple system could contribute to
the “growth” of unbiased and effective tourist guides, with
many implied benefits, including the discovery of interesting
locations well ahead to their appearance in the standard guides.
The paper addresses both functional and system related issues,
including inter-node communication, automatic preference
related data access and implied privacy needs.
Ghosh, on the other hand, shows how a context-management
infrastructure can be used by archaeologists in building a
knowledge base that can be available to the researchers, but
also, eventually, to others visiting the same area.
Both of these applications require a proper information flow
from data acquisition to data presentation, and therefore raise
interoperability issues, as pointed out by Garzotto.

2.2 Methodologies for embedding contextual
knowledge in mobile applications
In the past, much access to cultural heritage digital
presentations took place on the home PC or in virtual theatres,
often far from the real exhibits. Virtual museums and virtual
reconstructions are examples of such a usage model, where the
user experience is confined within the software application, in a
decontextualized space. New horizons disclosed when cultural
heritage applications went mobile, offering an opportunity to
use digital contents not to replace but to reinforce the value of
the experience within a cultural site, when the visitor is in front
of the materiality of the exhibits or naturally immersed in the
addressed real context. To be effective, such mobile

applications must be sensitive to the user context and must be
developed according to specific design guidelines. Three papers
address these issues.
Garzotto’s paper analyzes the differences between stationary
and mobile multimedia cultural heritage applications. It
provides a comprehensive set of practical design guidelines to
build a context-aware mobile application starting from a
stationary version.
Roffia’s paper shows how the use of context information can
help to simplify the user interface of mobile multimedia guides,
and argues that in this type of application the context can not be
limited to the user’s location and orientation. Rather a logical
context component is required to identify the level of
abstraction of the user’s focus of attention, according to the
hypothesis that it will always be possible to identify a hierarchy
in the cultural heritage site organization. For example, in a
museum with many displays of small objects, such a logical
coordinate is required to understand if a visitor looking at a
shelf is interested in an individual exhibit, in the set of exhibits
located on the shelf or in the entire display case.
Niu’s paper considers the need to personalize the mobile guide
according to preferences initially set by the user. Once the
preferences that act as components of the user context are set,
the system, adapts the tour to the user’s preferences using an
approach based on ontologies. Eventually, the user can inspect
the way in which the information displayed has been adapted,
and may change their user model to improve the personalized
behaviour of the guide.

2.3 Location and orientation subsystems
The development of smart environment applications requires a
considerable integration effort, and suitable tools are required to
support both application set up and algorithms verification.
For example, in the cultural and natural heritage domain we
need to devise new sensory solutions in order to recognize the
users activity and their focus of attention, with the goal of
anticipating their intentions; research on sensor systems for
wearable devices should be carried out, the main goal being to
close the gaps — that is cancelling all discontinuities —
between the visitor, the environment and the platform.
Similar challenges may have to be considered in other domains.
Bay, Li-wei and Jung address three frameworks that use
different technologies to support the implementation of location
and orientation aware distributed, mobile applications.

2.4 Ambient intelligence for outdoor
cultural experiences
The idea of a time machine that comprehensively visualizes the
history of the cities is not novel. For example, back in 1999 it
was used in a virtual reconstruction of Bologna city center, to
cover the historical period from the XIIIth to the XIXth century
(Nume project, [11]). This model could be enjoyed in a virtual
theatre or on the web, but it could not be accessed aligned with
the user’s location on a mobile device.
Two papers in the workshop show that such a historical
experience can be fruitfully enjoyed walking in today’s cities.
The lack of immersiveness of current mobile devices is
compensated by the cognitive and emotional impact of
simultaneous access to the reality and to the digital
representation of its history. The paper from Malkin describes a
digital graffiti system implemented in Manhattan, along a
religiously significant boundary, the route of the former 3rd
Avenue elevated train line. By deploying optical tags that

provide hyperlinks from physical locations to the web,
conceptually similar to the web-signs in the CoolTown program
at Hewlett Packard Laboratories, web-based information can be
accessed along the route, using mobile phones. Contents
include text and photographs of the locations as they appeared
from fifty to one hundred years ago.
Sukigara’s paper considers the problem of collecting, sharing
and using information about ruins and other remains, and
suggests a location-aware time-machine to provide mobile users
with a unified vision of the history, the politics and the religion
of large civilized areas. To this end multimedia contents aligned
to the user point of view but shifted back in time are presented,
confirming in this way that aligning contents with the user’s
viewpoint is a very versatile technique that can be used in many
cultural heritage applications, as also proposed within the
workshop by Li-wei and Roffia.

3. ISSUES NEEDING FURTHER
INVESTIGATION
Many ubiquitous computing issues remain to be examined by
the “smart environments for cultural heritage” community.
Some are outlined in this section.

3.1 Networking and Communications
Addressing communications over the range of scales envisaged
in the previous section will require different scales of
communication. This suggests that devices should be able to
adapt transparently to the available networks, taking account of
Quality of Service offered whilst minimizing costs to the user.
Reliability and availability of connection is also a well-known
issue. When data collectors work in remote locations, mobile
phone networks are invariably the only available form, yet even
these may lack continuous coverage of many mountainous areas
and locations far from population centers. Similar problems
may arise, albeit less frequently, for those following cultural
routes which pass through remote rural areas. Even indoors,
where WiFi or Bluetooth connectivity is available, coverage
may be partial or bandwidth may be reduced as the number of
participants increases. The problem may be particularly acute in
modern buildings containing large amounts of structural steel.
In summary, heritage applications will need to address the full
range of connectivity and communications issues that have been
recognized by the ubicomp community. At Ubicomp05,
Workshop W13, organized by Prof. Shiro Sakata from Chiba
University, is dedicated to wireless networking and
communications in ubiquitous computing; the interested readers
are invited to address to the related material.

3.2 Devices and Interoperability
So far, most heritage-oriented systems have typically been
based around a single class of user terminal device, such as a
production PDA. In a few cases, specialized devices have been
developed to address limitations of commercial products.
However, looking to the future, we must be prepared to deliver
services to a variety of different devices, including special
purpose terminals that are beginning to replace an earlier
generation of audio guides, but also PDA-like machines and,
especially, smart phones owned by the visitors.
Even if it is not yet clear whether a general-purpose “life
navigator” [6] accompanying all of our mobile experiences may
ever really exist, certainly current standard devices are often
inadequate. For example, in the cultural heritage domain, it is
doubtful that standard PDAs can be successfully used as
museum navigators, for reasons including a lack of embedded

context-management support, an inability to be accessed handsfree, internetworking bandwidth, and limited screen size and
brightness

heritage applications may have the potential to be used in more
general frameworks.

Better solutions may be provided by application-specific
navigators with ergonomics optimised to meet the user
requirements, and with functional specifications inspired by
research in context management and activity recognition,
context-based usability policies, context-based resource and
power management, space modeling, and technology
convergence. Mobile device architecture and design is a factor
in the success of smart cultural and natural heritage applications
and needs further investigation.

3.4 Personal Security and Privacy

In the cultural route model, there is also a requirement for
interoperability with vehicle and personal navigation systems,
as well as across and, possibly, between support infrastructures.
These infrastructures may be commissioned and operated by
different commercial or governmental institutions, yet visitors
will need to move smoothly between their coverages. There are
many open issues of importance to the ubicomp community
concerning how this might be achieved with a minimal impact
on the developers, implementers and managers of these separate
systems. Ideally we should be able to build once, yet
interoperate with many.
Within the Workshop, Garzotto considers the need for a sort of
interoperability between stationary and mobile devices called
“cross-channel workflow”. This is a requirement to support
user-centric rather than device-centric ubiquitous computing
already considered by other authors (e.g. the CMU Project Aura
team http://www.cs.cmu.edu/∼aura/). In cultural heritage smart
environments the envisaged applications are, for example, the
preparation at home of a personalized itinerary to be enjoyed en
route with the support of the electronic guide, or the annotation
of travel notes, to be developed when back home, at the home
station. Key issues at the design level are, in this context, the
interaction paradigms that assure smooth access to the user and
consistent information flow between the “interoperable”
devices.

3.3 Content Authoring
Usually, when we access a medium, two actors are involved: us
and the medium itself (e.g. the computer, the stage, the
television screen, the newspaper). In contrast, at a cultural or
natural heritage site, and more generally in most mobile
context-related applications, there are three actors: ourselves,
the mobile device and the “target” of our attention, i.e. an
application-specific real object (e.g. the exhibit in a museum).
Multimedia content, therefore, should not surrogate the target
real object, as normally happens in a DVD or on the Internet,
but should be the catalyst of the “resonance” between the users
and their environment. So, we need to find new cognitive
models, new ways of mixing audio, video and text, new
methods to handle interactivity and to create “contextual
multimedia” for on-site access.
While the design trade-offs of context-aware mobile
applications are clearly addressed in Garzotto’s paper, the
specific issue of content authoring was not addressed by the
Workshop participants. In contrast, this issue is currently
considered by many cultural institutions: for example, the
contents under development within the MUSE project [7], are
based on research carried out at two Italian museums, the
Certosa e Museo di San Martino in Napoli, and il Museo di
Storia della Scienza in Florence. The time has come to
investigate content authoring methodologies for location-based
services and the experience gained in cultural and natural

Privacy is a recognized issue in ubiquitous computing, albeit
one that has received relative little attention. In the kinds of
systems covered by this workshop, it will be an important
consideration where many users will be expected to visit
multiple sites/museums and where there may be benefits to the
user experience to be gained by sharing information about the
user’s activities and interests between sites. Potentially there
may be conflicts between personal privacy and commercial
interests as different sites may be operated by separate
companies who may view visitor information as commercially
confidential. The issue of personal security and privacy is
considered by Sklenar in his paper on growing a tourist guide
with the contribution of the tourists: in such application, “the
device knows the tourist location and personal preferences,
and is sending this data out to some server somewhere. Hence
the mechanism to do this would have to ensure that a user’s
identity is kept secret. Randomly generated keys could be used
to link requests with resulting generated location lists, making
sure the server cannot link the data it receives to any particular
person.”
At Ubicomp05, Workshop W4 organized by Prof. John Canny
from the University of California, Berkeley is dedicated to
privacy in ubiquitous computing; the interested readers are
invited to focus on W4 website.

4. CONCLUSIONS
The papers presented here provide a snapshot of current
research directions in several related areas. They have been
grouped under four headings reflecting the topics addressed by
their authors: Building context related knowledge bases;
Methodologies for embedding contextual knowledge in mobile
applications; Location and orientation subsystems; and Ambient
intelligence for outdoor cultural experiences.
We began by suggesting that smart environments, ubiquitous
computing and context-aware systems had much to offer to a
broad spectrum of cultural heritage applications, ranging from
the production of knowledge, through the research,
management and conservation of collections, to public
presentation. The papers presented here confirm our impression
that the majority of effort to date has been focused on the two
ends of this ‘pipeline’. The application of ubicomp technologies
across this spectrum of activities in a way that addresses the
issues covered in section 3 (networking and communications,
devices and interoperability, content authoring and personal
privacy) remains a challenge to the research community.

REFERENCES
[1] Weiser, M. and Seely Brown, J., The Coming Age of Calm
Technology. In Denning & Metcalfe (Eds.). Beyond
Calculation: The Next 50 Years of Computing. SpringerVerlag, 1997.
[2] Spasojevic, M. and Kindberg, T., A study of an
Augmented Museum Experience, HP Laboratories, Palo
Alto, July 2001,
http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2001/HPL-2001178.pdf
[3] Vlahakis, V., Demiris, A., Bounos, E. and Ioannidis, N., A
novel Approach to Context-Sensitive Guided e-Tours in
Cultural Sites: “Light” Augmented Reality on PDAs, in
Chrysanthou, Y., Cain, K., Silberman, N. & Niccolucci, F.

(eds), VAST 2004, 5th International Symposium on Virtual
Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage,
December 2004
[4] Pascoe, J., Morse, DR., and Ryan, NS., Developing
personal technology for the field, Personal Technologies,
2:28-36, August 1998.
[5] Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Cheverst, K. and Friaday, A.,
1999, Caches in the Air: Disseminating Tourist
Information in the Guide System, 2nd IEEE Workshop on
Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, New
Orleans, USA, 11-19.
[6] Kostov V., Ozawa J., Matsuura S., Analysis of Wearable
Interface Factors for Appropriate Information Notification,
8th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable
Computers (ISWC2004, Arlinton, Virginia), Oct 31 – Nov
3, 2004, Proceedings, pp. 102 - 109
[7] Salmon Cinotti, T., Raffa, G., Roffia, L., Garzotto, F.,
Muzii, R., Varlese, V., Malavasi, M. and Galasso, S.,
Evaluating Context-aware Mobile Applications in
Museums: Experiences from the MUSE project, Museums
and the Web, 2004,
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2004/papers/salmon/salmon.html

[8] Ryan, N.S., Smart Environments for Cultural Heritage,
24th International Research Symposium, International
Research Center for Japanese Studies, Kyoto, February 711, 2005.
http://www.cs.kent.ac.uk/~nsr/papers/kyoto2005/SmartEnv
CH.pdf
[9] Ma L., Smith D.J., Ryan N.S., Acoustic Environment as an
Indicator of Social and Physical Context, to be published
in Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 2005.
[10] Salmon Cinotti T., Nagaraj R., Mincolelli G., Sforza F.,
Raffa G., Roffia L., WHYRE: a Context-aware Wearable
Computer for Museums and Archaeological Sites, 8th
IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers
(ISWC2004, Arlinton, Virginia), Oct 31 – Nov 3, 2004,
Proceedings, pp. 174 – 175
[11] Bocchi F., Bonfigli M. E., Ghizzoni M., Smurra R., Lugli
F., The 4D virtual Museum of the City of Bologna, Italy,
Siggraph 1999, Los Angeles, August 1999.

Workshop Organizers
Nick Ryan is a member of the Pervasive Computing research
group in the Computing Laboratory at the University of Kent,
Canterbury, UK. The group has a wide range of experience,
particularly in deploying systems in rugged outdoor
environments. He has worked in ubiquitous/pervasive
computing since the mid-nineties, concentrating in the area of
data capture and information access applications for use in the
field sciences, including archaeology and ecology [4][8]. This
work led to an interest in support infrastructures for a wide
range of ubiquitous applications, including the development of
the Kent MobiComp infrastructure [8][9].
Tullio Salmon Cinotti is a member and one of the proposers of
ARCES a Research Center on Electronic Systems for
Information and Communication Technologies at the
University of Bologna, Italy. He works on context-aware
computing, concentrating on applications requiring
unobtrusive ambient intellegence. He is the coordinator of
MUSE [7], the project originating WHYRE [10], a contextsensitive wearable computer for museums and archaeological
sites.
Giuseppe Raffa is a PhD student at the University of Bologna
and he is also a member of ARCES. He works on localization
and context recognition in mobile indoor and outdoor cultural
heritage applications, and he concentrates on the interaction
between the sensors output and the human-computer interface.
All three are involved in EPOCH, the European 6th Framework
Network of Excellence on Intelligent Heritage (www.epochnet.org). EPOCH is a network of more than 80 European
cultural and technological institutions joining their efforts to
improve the quality and effectiveness of the use of Information
and Communications Technology in Cultural Heritage. Ryan is
a member of the EPOCH Board of Directors and is responsible
for coordinating efforts in the areas of mobile, wearable and
ambient computing. Together with three other EPOCH
partners, Ryan, Salmon Cinotti and Raffa are currently
involved in the EPOCH project CIMAD, an exploratory
implementation of a framework for smart CH environments
supporting distributed and mobile on-site applications, from
data capture to public dissemination.

