THE RESEARCH AND APPLICATION OF SPATIAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
IN CULTURAL HERITAGE CONSERVATION
— CASE STUDY ON GRAND CANAL OF CHINA
Feng Mao, Ze Liu*, Wensheng Zhou, Jianxi Huang, Qiang Li

School of Architecture, Tsinghua University, - liuze06@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
KEY WORDS: Spatial Information Sciences, Cultural Heritage, Grand Canal of China, Research, Application

ABSTRACT:
This work is part of a multidisciplinary research project, within the National Key Technology R&D Program, “The Research and
Application of Spatial Information Technology for conservation of large-scale heritage sites”, developed in collaboration with
archaeologists and researchers from the field of geoinfomatics and hydrology, which aims at the application of spatial information
technology for cultural heritage conservation, especially the large-scale heritage sits, a case study on Grand Canal of China is carried
out. This paper presents the principal achievements we have gotten and puts forward some challenging issuers accordingly. At first,
the related definitions are discussed; and some successful cases are reviewed. After the review, an integrated framework for the
application of spatial information technology in conserving cultural heritage is conceived, based upon analysis of whole conserving
process, information transferring flow, and domain model. Then the content and framework of this research project are studied by
the logic and technical structure. Some key methods involved are discussed subsequently; also the main results and new findings are
investigated in details. Finally combing with the opinions from experts of cultural heritage conservation, this paper concludes the
project’s established results objectively, and present the research plan in the future. The involved contents of this study could be
found on http://geospatial.arch.tsinghua.edu.cn, a website developed for this project especially.

some issues of intangible cultural heritages along Grand Canal
of China (GCC).

1. INTRODUCTION
There are many successful examples indicating that spatial
information technology (SIT) is very useful and necessary to
conserve historical cultural heritages, including the serial
processes of prospecting, investigating, extracting, preservation
planning, documenting and monitoring. Especially Geography
Information System (GIS) and Remote Sensing (RS) have been
widely used to carry out related activities.

1.1.2 Cultural Heritage Conservation
Following the hints of above dissertations, it can be discerned
an integral process of cultural heritage conservation should at
least include 1) prospecting for cultural heritage and
investigating correspondingly; 2) evaluation of cultural heritage,
including its values, preservation status, potential hazards and
so on; 3) establishing and carrying out reasonable preservation
planning; 4) effective monitoring on cultural heritage and
feedback in time. In the section 2, a flow chart of applying SIT
in each aspects of cultural heritage conservation will be brought
out and discussed detailedly.

1.1 Cultural Heritage and Cultural Heritage Conservation
A concise discussion and perhaps definition of “cultural
heritage” and “cultural heritage conservation” is conducted here
in order to confine the scope of this study, and ensure the
common understanding of the terms mentioned in this paper.

1.2 SIT Applied to Cultural Heritages Conservation

1.1.1 Cultural Heritage
Cultural can be represented by material objects like buildings,
paintings and monuments, but also non-material manifestations
like language, dance, song, cuisine, custom, religion, landscape,
literature, art, philosophy and, even television programs
(Ogleby, 1995). In 1954 the General Conference of UNESCO
adopted the term, cultural heritage, as an international
convention on the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event
of Armed Conflict (known as Hague Convention), which refers
cultural property as tangible and physical objects. The similar
meaning can be found from the famous Convention Concerning
the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage in
1972, also by General Conference of UNESCO. For the sake of
this study the above meaning will suffice as it is generally
accepted. Much of this paper will concentrate on SIT
applications to material cultural heritage, but it will also address

1.2.1 Digital Recording and Analysis Based upon GIS
Last decades witnessed the rapid increase of applying GIS to
preserve cultural heritage. GIS is mainly used for cultural
resource inventory applications, protections planning, impact
assessment studies, facilities management and archaeological
research applications. In 1990s UNESCO utilized GIS to
integrate data efficiently from the field of archaeology,
geography, hydrology, weather, environment and demographic
data in the Angkor Zoning and Environment Management Plan,
Cambodia. Then the usefulness of GIS was demonstrated in
other UNESCO pilot sites at Hue, Viet Nam and Vat Phou, Lao
PDR and other sites in Europe, Australia and North America
(Paul Box, 1990).
GIS, especially spatial analysis plays a significant role in
archaeological research, etc, landscape archaeology, predictive

* Corresponding author
999

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

location modelling. Based upon a filed archaeology geography
information syetem, archaeologist can predict the potential
archaeological sites location, discover the pattern of
prehistorical settlements, and realize relationship between
settlements and topography through viewed analysis. In line
with former studies on predictive modelling, Espa presented a
GIS based method to produce probability maps of
archaeological site locations automatically (Espa et al., 2006).
Using serration analysis, corresponding analysis and other
spatial analysis methods, archaeologists study the occurrence of
157 bead types at 98 European Aurigacian sites to get the
knowledge of the first anatomically modern populations
colonising the European territory of their degrees of biological,
linguistic, and cultural diversity at different settlements
(Vanhaeren et al., 2006 ).
While other archaeologists
conducted a case study at Bronze Age cairns of North Mull,
Scotland applied rigorous statistical analysis and viewed
analysis to studying the visible area (Fisher et al., 1997).
1.2.2 Remote Sensing for Archaeology
Surface features caused by historic sites can be recorded by
remotely sensed aerial and satellite imagery, including
multispectral, hyper-spectral, and synthetic aperture radar
imagery. With the capacity of detecting, cataloguing,
differentiating and classifying surface and near surface
underground historical relic features, remote sensing can get
better realization of the features, their patterns, textures, size,
association, and so on, and plays an important role in the
investigation, prospection, and management of various cultural
heritages.
Information extracted from radar imagery, multispectral
imagery, hyperspectral imagery, thermal infrared imagery,
panchromatic and colour infrared imagery, combined with field
surveying, had been used to look back in time and trace clues of
ancient civilization, showing the value of modern technology to
help us find the history recorded on Earth’s surface (Fisher et
al., 1999; Trelogan et al., 1999; Blom et al., 2000; Tan et al.,
2006). In particular, Air photos, ETM+, and TM images were
utilized as major tools in archaeological investigation to
indentify the boundaries of the historical sites of Persepolis
(Behnaz Aminazadeh et al., 2006). In addition, Kucukkaya
reported a series of topics at session Q2 of the Fifth World
Archaeological Congress (WAC5) which aiming to address the
problem of the management of cultural heritage and
archaeological areas with remote sensing (Kucukkya, 2004).

1.2.3 Visual
Methods
for
Cultural
Heritages
Conservation
Recently the methods necessary for utilizing threedimensional(3D) visualization and virtual reality in modelling,
simulating, digital preserving, auxiliary restoring of historical
cultural resources and environment have been studied carefully.
During the restoration process of an ancient bronze statue, the
Minerva of Arezzo, located at Museo Archeologico in Florence,
complete 3D digital models of the Minerva were produced to
keep track of the variations that occurred during the restoration
process, up to the final acquisition of the form of the restored
artwork (Fontana et al., 2002). Especially virtual reality (VR)
was applied to develop 3D visualization tools and support
virtual archaeology activities (Allen et al., 2003; Vote et al.,
2002). Furthermore Winterbotom used geographic information
systems (GIS) based analyses and VR reconstructions, to
explore landscape context for two types of Neolithic
monuments: cup and ring rock art and a stone circle, then

suggested that VR would be useful to explore visually rich
representations of past environments for site interpretation,
present uncertainty and test different scenarios for landscape
archaeology context (Winterbottom et al., 2006).
1.2.4 Other Useful Methods: The development of
alternative techniques and methods for the cultural heritage
conservation has been identified as an important aspect in the
last years. A remarkable case is that Global Position System
(GPS) is wildly applied to archaeological prospection, spatial
data acquisition, 3D geometric modelling and other potential
use. Additionally 3D laser scanning addresses problem of
modelling, detecting the minor transformation of statue and
valuable construction quickly.
Based on high-resolution micro-topographical data generated
by GPS surveys, Chapman brought forward a new
archaeological prospection technique for wetlands, and
conducted a subsequent programme of ground truthing to
demonstrate the value (Chapman et al., 2001). In 2007, Losier
presented a procedure developed to generate 3D models from
GPS positions taken at the top and the bottom of the excavation
units boundaries on the archaeological site of Tell Acharneh,
Syria; the results showed that comparing with the usual
procedure, with a theodolite or a total station, the work in the
field with a GPS RTK allowed archaeologists to collect more
points of an excavation unit within the same time period, and
build a 3D geometrical modelling of extraction units easily
(Losier et al., 2007).

2. METHODS AND PROCEDURE
2.1 The Study Area
The Grand Canal of China, a masterpiece by ancient Chinese
similar to the Great Wall, stretching from Hangzhou in the
south to Beijing in the North, is the world’s longest and oldest
man-made waterway (Figure 1; Figure 2). It is about 1,794
kilometres long, and connects five major water systems,
including the Yangtze and the Yellow River. As a whole, The
Canal was built, section by section, in different areas and under
different dynasties, started form 5th century B.C. and complete
by the year 1327. The Grand Canal of China, as the main
transportation linking the nation’s capital city in the fertile
northern region to its most affluent territory in the southern
region, promoting economic and cultural exchanges and
strengthening the unification of the country, played a significant
role in the history of China. Needham estimated(Needham,
Joseph, 1971), “Nothing remotely approaching the Chinese
canal systems existed in Europe until the four great
seventeenth-century canals in France,……even by 1893 the
total mileage of French canals had only reached three times the
length of China’s Grand Canal alone in 1300.”
With a profound history more than 2400 years, a unique culture
and folk customers associated with the canal’s evolution,
formed. Along the canal, there are countless magnificent
cultural relics, and the canal has been hailed as “a long corridor
of ancient culture”, and “a show room of folk customs”. In the
year of 2006, State Administration of Cultural Heritage added
the Grand Canal of China on the list of heritages to apply for
World Cultural Heritage to UNESCO. Several research projects
are carried out to strengthen the preservation of the canal. This
study is one of the research projects, and plans to employ
spatial information technology to backup the preservation

1000

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

because of the canal’s unique spatial-temporal characters, help
general peoples, professionals and governments enhancing their
realization, research and management of the canal, especially to
support the proposing for world cultural heritage with detailed
cultural heritage document and excellent spatial information
management.

planning supporting system based upon GIS and VR has
achieved great success (Geertman et al., 2003). Finally RS is
applied for regular checking and monitoring of cultural heritage,
especially large-scale cultural site in order to acquire effective
feed back.
On the basis of above application flow chart, the content of this
research project is mainly organized into four proportions. The
first one is to study and set up necessary standards for the
application of spatial information technology in the field of
cultural heritage conservation. The second part is the research
of key technologies involved, including cultural relics
investigating with remote sensing, reconstruction and 3D
modelling of the canal and spatial analysis utilized in field
archaeology. The third one is research and development of
spatial data base, geography information system, conservation
planning support system of the canal, and spatial data collecting
system based upon GPS and PDA. Finally based upon the rich
content of spatial database and established functions of above
information systems, some thematic studies are carried out, in
cooperation with professionals from hydraulic history and
cultural heritage conservation, including evolutionary process
of GCC, LUCC studies on certain sites, and the distribution of
cultural heritages along GCC.

Figure 1. Grand Canal during the Yuan Dynasty, 1280-1367 BC
Adapted from Leonard (1996)
2.2 The Framework of SIT Applied to Conservation GCC
Based upon the analysis of current practice of cultural heritage
conservation in China, a comprehensive framework showing the
application of SIT is proposed (Figure 3). At first, the whole
process is divided into several parts, investigating and
prospecting cultural heritage, assessing heritage’s value,
determining conservation grade, establishing and implementing
preservation plan, monitoring and feedback timely. During each
single part, there are many methods of applying SIT to carry
out the corresponding protecting activities as discussed in part 1
of this paper.
For protecting and investigation, GIS, RS and GPS technologies
are integrated to indentify the cultural resources from their
environments, and would keep a digital document completely.
For assessing of heritages, there are value evaluation, health
evaluation, and assessing of management condition, which
would take use of the supporting ability of spatial information
technology. After the step of evaluation, SIT can be used to fix
grades of cultural resources into world heritage, national
heritage, provincial heritage and county-heritage, taking
account of laws, historical background, and local customs.
Then the conservation plan would be issued and carried out to
safeguard cultural property from grave-robbers, protect cultural
sites from environment degradation, mostly related to
unchecked urban development. SIT would be found necessary
in this process as showed in the field of urban planning, where
1001

Figure 2. The Grand Canal of China on remote sensing
imagery

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

PDA with GPS module. The first two systems are discussed
particularly as follows.
3.2.1 GIS for GCC: A GIS system with two versions is
developed for GCC conservation, which could be managed on
desktop
or
visited
via
Internet
(http://geospatial.arch.tsinghua.edu.cn ) respectively, including
spatial database, fundamental module as functions of general
GIS system, and extended module for professional user(Figure
5).
Implementing with the tools of ArcSDE and Oracle 10g, the
spatial data is organized into three levels with different scales
(macro, meso and micro). At the macro-level, ETM (14 scenes)
is used, together with the DLG at the scale of 1:250,000(14
pages). At the meso-level, there are SPOT 5 (42 scenes) and
DLG with the scale of 1:50,000 (105 pages). All the spatial data
at the above two levels respectively covers the extension of the
canal. At the micro-level, QuickBird imagery is used for seven
important historical sites or cities along the canal, Beijing (214
km2), Tianjin (836 km2), Cangzhou (410 km2), Jining (215 km2),
Liaocheng (315km2), Pizhou (925km2), Hangzhou (321 km2),
together with DLGs at the scale of 1:10,000(392 pages) which
also cover the canal with a given buffer. Except for data at the
three levels, there are many precious old panchromatic air photo
taken by American air force during the period of World War 2.
Facing the huge amount of images and datasets, some methods
are employed to improve the efficiency of the spatial data base
(Shekhar et al., 2003.).

Figure 3. the flow chart for application of SIT
in cultural heritage conservation

3. MAIN RESULTS FROM ESTABLISED STUDIES
3.1 Standards for applying SIT to cultural heritage
conservation
Types of cultural resource along GCC are so diversiform that
almost all known types of cultural heritages in other places of
China could be found there, they may be hydraulic facility,
historical architecture, statue, mausoleum, and so on. It appears
necessary to set some standards to guide the attempt of get the
information from remote sensing imagery, surveying results of
GPS, and make sure the field investigations data, which holds
the form of tables, graphics and archaeological reports, could be
imported to the data base correctly. A series of standards are
designed by experts of information technology, together with
researchers of cultural resource conservation and professionals
from field archaeology, including regulations of dada collecting
with a custom PDA, standards for classifying and coding of
cultural resources, rules for data types and data structures in
spatial data base.
3.2 Information Systems for GCC conservation
On the basis of studies on key technologies, four information
systems have been developed to support the conservation of
GCC, including GIS system of GCC, 3D landscape simulation
system, conservation planning supporting system, and data
collecting system for field investigation based on customized

Figure 4. The GIS system for GCC conservation
The GIS system has shown its value in an archaeological
extraction approved by government, at Nanwang, Shandong
province. With the help of local archaeologists, we utilize the
satellite imagery to detect disappearing channels. Moreover the
GIS system is used to manage the documents and surveying
datasets, visualize the extraction site, and predict potential
archaeological site locations.
3.2.2 3D Simulation System of GCC
A 3D simulation system is build to modelling the landscape
along GCC, using the data of DEM and SPOT 5, following the
methods we have introduced for simulating Jinjiang Basin with
special corrections (Huang et al., 2006; Pollefeys et al., 2000).
Regarding to the massive data of this project, Oracle 10g is
chosen to manage the spatial data and feature attribute, instead
of the Microsoft Access. There are two attractive characters of
this system. The first one is the multi-scale simulation and

1002

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

modelling, from the large landscape of GCC to a historical site
along it; moreover it can be visited from Internet by the same
address mentioned above.

development of the canal cities. Figure 7 indicates the case
study we have conducted at Yangzhou city, Jiangsu province.
Based on imagery in 1954, 1998, and 2002, the study used
extraction after classified method to monitor land use changes
from 1954 to 2002; while classifying, the object-oriented
method was used to extract features in different temporal
imagery. The result has been accepted by proceeding
Geoinfomatics2008 at Guangzhou city, China, and will be
securable soon.

Figure 5. Visualization of a historical building in the 3D
simulation system
Figure 5 shows a historical building, Shanxi & Shaanxi
Proinvincial Guildhall at Liaocheng city，Shandong pronince,
build in 1743,Qing dynasty, which has been restricted in the 3D
simulation system. Visitors can fly through in that virtual senses
freely and enjoy the gorgeous and elaborate building through
Internet.
3.3 Related Thematic Researches
3.3.1 Spatial-Temporal evolution of GCC’s channels
Combined with historical documents and Chinese traditional
atlas on GCC, we endeavour to reveal the spatial-temporal
evolutions of GCC with SIT from the time of its building.

Figure 7. LUCC of Yangzhou, a southern city along GCC
3.3.3 Investigation of cultural resources along GCC
With the support of data collecting system based upon handheld PDA, professionals of cultural heritage conservation from
Beijing city, Tianjin city, Hebei province, Shandong province,
Jiangsu province and Zhejiang province carried out field
investigations along the GCC. Related data is recorded
following the established standards, and then pre-processed data
is storied in spatial database and presented with geography
information system with designed symbols. Figure 8 shows
cultural resources of GCC at Beiwu Lanke districts near Jining
city, Shandong province.

Figure 6. The variation detection of GCC’s channels at Qingkou,
Figure 6 shows the evolution of GCC at a crucial node,
Qingkou, Huaian city, Jiangsu province, where eight rivers
meet and cause obvious changes, including abandoned yellow
river and GCC. The lines on the left graphic are channels
extracted from air photo in 1954, the base map is TM imagery
of 1989 with the resolution of 30m, while the lines on the right
graphic are channels in 2000 gained from documents, and the
base map is merged SPOT5 imagery of 2006 with the resolution
of 2.5m.The result has been accepted by the Journal of
Tsinghua University (Science and Technology) and will be
published soon.
3.3.2 Land use and land cover changes of important canal
cities and some special canal sites
The study of LUCC on GCC regions would reflect close
connections between GCC and its surroundings; driving factors
of its evolutions from natural perspective as well as socioeconomical, and to what level GCC had influenced the

Figure 8. Cultural resources of GCC at Beiwu Lake district
near Jining city

4. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
We have utilized common SIT in the GCC study of
investigation and conservation, including GIS, RS, GPS and the
visual method, VR. The results indicate that

1003

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

(1) A framework is brought out for applying SIT to conserve
historical cultural heritage in China, which plays as the
guideline of our research activities.
(2) Combined with satellite image of high resolution, early
panchromatic aerial photography are useful to detect the spatial
morphological anomalies of GCC caused by modern
construction activities.
(3) Multi-scale, multi-source and multi-temporal data are
necessary to investigate and conserve large-scale historical sites
with the ability of detect the long evolution trends
comprehensively.
(4) This work has explored the evolutional process of GCC at
Qingkou district, Huaian city, Shandong province in recent
sixty years, which shows the great potential of SIT in the
archaeological prospecting.
(5) The satellite image was utilized to probe the LUCC of cities
near GCC, aiming to found the connections between cities and
GCC, especially in terms of spatial characters. Researchers
from the field of archaeology and urban study have argued
about the complex relationship between GCC and the cities near
by. The ancient status could be only acquired from historical
literature, while the current changing process can be obtained
from remote imagery.
(6) Handheld PDA with the GPS module was used to assist
conservator investigating GCC in several regions, including
Beijing city, Tianjin city, Shandong province, Hebei province,
Jiansu province, Zhejiang province. From Sep. 2007, those
equipments also have been utilized to facilitate 3rd National
Cultural Resources Investigation in above regions.
(7) On the basis of this activity further studies have been
planned to improve the accuracy of the acquired knowledge to
extend it to all known cultural heritages along GCC, and to
validate the framework at the new depth, which will then
become the reference for conserving large-scale historical sites.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was carried out with the support from National Key
Technology R&D Program contract research (NO.:
2006bak30b01). We are grateful to experts from China National
Institute of Cultural Property and conservation professionals
from Beijing city, Tianjin city, Shandong province, Hebei
province, Jiangsu Province and Zhejiang province for their
professional advices and prominent investigation works.
Authors also appreciate Prof. Nie from Institute of remote
sensing applications, CAS, Prof. Tan from China Institute of
Water Resource and Hydropower Research, and teams under
their instruction respectively for our wonderful cooperation.

REFERENCES
Allen P; Troccoli A; Smith S et al, 2003. New methods for
digital modelling of historic sites. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 23(6).pp.32-41.
Blom, R.G.; Chapman, B., Podest, E., Murowchick, R., 2000.
Applications of remote sensing to archaeological studies of
early Shang civilization in northern China. In: Proceeding of the

2000 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium, Honolulu,HI, Germany. pp. 2483-2485.
Behnaz Aminzadeh; Firuzeh Samani, 2006. Identifying the
boundaries of the historical site of Persepolis using remote
sensing. Remote Sensing of Environment, 102. pp. 52-62.
Chapman, H. P.; Van, N. R., 2001. High-Resolution Wetland
Prospection, using GPS and GIS: Landscape Studies at Sutton
Common (South Yorkshire), and Meare Village East (Somerset).
Journal of Archaeological Science, 28(4). pp. 365-375.
Clark, C.D.; Garrod, S.M.; Parker, M., 1998. Landscape
archaeology and remote sensing in southern Madagascar.
International Journal of Remote Sensing, 19. pp. 1461-1477.
Espa, G; Benedetti, R; De, Meo A; Ricci, U; Espa, S, 2006. GIS
based models and estimation methods for the probability of
archaeological site location. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 7(3),
pp. 147-155.
Fisher, J.; Fisher, B., 1999. The Use of KidSat images in the
further pursuit of the frankincense roads to Ubar. IEEE
transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 37(4), pp.
1841-1847.
Fisher, P.; Farrelly, C. et al, 1997. Spatial analysis of visible
areas from the Bronze Age Cairns of Mull. Journal of
Archaeological Science, 24(7), pp. 581-592.
Fontana, R.; Greco, M.; Materazzi, M.; 2002. Threedimensional modelling of statues: the Minerva of Arezzo.
Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2002, 3(4), pp.325-331.
Geertman S., Stillwell J. 2003, Planning Support System in
Practice. Springer, Berlin, pp.3.
Huang J.X.; Mao F.; Xu W.B.; Li J.; Lei T.Z.; 2006.
Implementation of Large Area Valley Simulation System Based
on VegaPrime. Journal of System Simulation, 2006, 18(10), pp.
2820-2831. (in Chinese with English abstract)
Kucukkya A.G., 2004. Photogrammetry and remote sensing in
archaeology. Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy&
Radioactive Transfer, 88.pp. 83-88.
Losier, L.; Pouliot, J.; Fortin, M., 2007. 3D geometrical
modeling of excavation units at the archaeological site of Tell
Acharneh (Syria). Journal of Archaeological Science, 34(2),
pp.272-288.
Needham, Joseph, 1971. Science and Civilisation in China. Vol.
4: Physics and Physical Technology, Patr III: Civil Engineering
and Nautics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ogleby C.L., 1995. Advances in the digital recording of cultural
monuments. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetric and Remote
Sensing, 50(3), pp.8-19.
Paul Fox, 1999, GIS and cultural resource management: a
manual for heritage managers. UNESCO, pp. 6-7.
Pollefeys M.; Koch R.; Vergauwen, M.L.; Van Gool, 2000.
Automated reconstruction of 3D scenes from sequences of
images. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry&Remote Sensing,
55, pp. 251-267.

1004

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

Shekhar S.; Chawla S., 2003. Spatial Database: A Tour.
Prentice Hall, Columbus, pp. 154-158.
Tan K.; Wang Y.; Zhou X.; Song D.; Duan Q.; 2006. The
application of remote sensing technology in the archaeological
study of the Mausoleum of Emperor Qinshihuang. International
Journal of Remote Sensing, 27(16), pp. 3347-3363.
Trelogan, J.; Crawford, M.; Teng, L.; Kwon, O.; Carter, J.;
1999. Mapping of the chora of chersonesos via remote sensing
data. In: Proceeding of the 1999 IEEE International Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium, Hamburg, Germany. pp.
2569-2571.

Vanhaeren, Marian; d, Errico Francesco, 2006. Aurignacian
ethno-linguistic geography of Europe revealed by personal
ornaments. Journal of Archaeological Science, 33(8), pp.11051128.
Vote, E; Feliz, D.A.; Laidlaw, D. H.; Joukowsky, M.S., 2002.
Discovering Petra: archaeological analysis in VR. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 22(5), pp. 38-50.
Winterbottom, S.J.; Long, D., 2006. From abstract digital
models to rich virtual environments: landscape contexts in
Kilmartin Glen, Scotland. Journal of Archaeological Science,
33(10),pp.1356-1367.

1005

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part B5. Beijing 2008

1006

