The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

TUTANKHAMEN’S TWO TOMBS: REPLICA CREATION AND THE PRESERVATION
OF OUR CULTURAL HERITAGE IN THE DIGITAL AGE
L. Wong 1*, M. Santana Quintero 2
1

Getty Conservation Institute, 1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 700, Los Angeles, CA 90049-1684, USA
LWong@getty.edu
2
Carleton Immersive Media Studio, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel by Drive, Ottawa, K1J 5B6 Canada –
Mario.Santana@carleton.ca
Commission VI, WG VI/4

KEY WORDS: Cultural Heritage, Conservation, Preservation, 3D Digital Documentation, Recording, Replicas

ABSTRACT:
There are two tombs of Tutankhamen both located in Luxor, Egypt: one in the Valley of the Kings, excavated into the Theban
bedrock and decorated with wall paintings, dating from 1323 BCE; the other, installed 3 km away, opened in April 2014 and is
considered to be an ‘exact facsimile’ of the original tomb. Tutankhamen’s tomb is just one example of a cultural heritage site that has
been replicated. This list is steadily growing as replicas are finding renewed favour fuelled by technological advancements in threedimensional recording, capture and fabrication which has enabled the production of highly accurate replicas in both physical and
virtual form. Comparisons drawn between the two tombs of Tutankhamen—the original and the replica—aim to highlight the
differing approaches of parallel preservation projects and intends to prompt questions surrounding the commissioning and use of
replicas in the cultural heritage field and the growing role that 3D digital technology is playing in the preservation/conservation
sector. Sites and cultural heritage organization are scrambling to be part of the 3D digital revolution. But, has the transition to 3D
and the revival in replicas happened too quickly and at the expense of a site’s other conservation needs? Is technology being used in
the service of conservation and preservation or is it the other way around? How can those working with heritage balance the benefit
of 3D technology with the overall conservation needs for a site? Using the example of Tutankhamen’s two tombs this paper aims to
provoke discussion on these topics.

1. INTRODUCTION
In 2009, the Getty Conservation Institute began a collaborative
project with Egypt’s Ministry of Antiquities to conserve the
tomb of Tutankhamen in the Valley of the Kings, Luxor. This
work was completed in early 2019. In parallel to this, a separate
project by the Madrid-based Factum Foundation for Digital
Technology in Conservation undertook high resolution image
capture and laser scanning in the tomb in 2009. Five years later,
in 2014, a replica of the tomb, considered to be an ‘exact
facsimile’ by its creator, was installed at Carter House, 3 km
away from the location of the original tomb. Today both tombs
are open to visitors (see Figures 1-4).
The comparisons and contrasts drawn between the two tombs of
Tutankhamen in this paper—the original and the replica—aim
to highlight the differing approaches and narratives of
overlapping conservation projects and intends to prompt
questions surrounding the commissioning and use of replicas in
the cultural heritage field and the growing role that 3D digital
technology is playing in the preservation and conservation
sector.
1.1

The 3D ‘Digital Revolution’

The 1990s and early 2000s, heralded in a ‘digital revolution’
introducing a promising range of emerging tools for cultural
heritage from the 3D to multimedia to the immersive world of
virtual and augmented reality (Addison, 2001). This technology
was received with great expectation as it offered the potential to

advance the field in much needed areas of documentation,
modelling and analyses, and the presentation and interpretation
of heritage sites.
In the two decades that followed, technology in this area has
continued to advance in terms of portability and reliability of
instrumentation, accuracy and speed, and innovation in physical
fabrication (i.e. computer numerical controlled milling and
rapid prototyping) and immersive technology as well as the
substantial lowering of costs. Sites, museums and cultural
heritage organization are scrambling to be part of this 3D digital
revolution and physical and virtual forms of replication are
increasingly being utilized.
1.2

The Role of Replicas in Cultural Heritage

Tutankhamen’s tomb is just one example of a cultural heritage
site that has been 3D recorded and physically replicated. The
rock art sites of Lascaux and Chauvet in France and Altamira in
Spain are three other well-known cases where replicas now
stand in for the original as the sites themselves have been closed
for their protection. Many other examples exist and this list is
steadily growing fuelled by the technological advancements in
3D recording, capture, physical fabrication, digital modelling
and virtual and augmented reality.
No one can dispute the beneficial uses that replicas have
enabled: allowing access to an otherwise closed or inaccessible
site, increasing awareness and engagement, serving interpretive
and educational purposes, and aiding researchers, to name only

* Corresponding author

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-1145-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

1145

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

Figure 1. The entrance to the tomb of Tutankhamen, Valley of
the Kings © J. Paul Getty Trust 2009

Figure 2. The entrance to the replica tomb of Tutankhamen at
Carter House © J. Paul Getty Trust 2009

Figure 3. The tomb of Tutankhamen, Valley of the Kings
© J. Paul Getty Trust 2015

Figure 4. The replica tomb of Tutankhamen at Carter House
© J. Paul Getty Trust 2019

a few. Today the potential role replicas can play continues to
expand to now serve specific conservation objectives ranging
from the creation of an archival and documentary record of a
site for posterity to alleviating pressure from mass tourism by
drawing tourists away from the actual site. The growing
prominence and use of replicas in the cultural heritage field
urges us to take a more careful and nuanced look at the
commissioning, fabrication and application of these objects.

the resurgence and renewed favour in replicas happened too
quickly and at the expense of a site’s other conservation needs?
Is technology really being used in the service of conservation
and preservation? Or, is it the other way around? Using the
example of Tutankhamen’s two tombs this paper aims to
provoke discussion on these topics and to begin to look at how
those working with heritage can balance the benefit of 3D
technology and replica creation with the overall conservation
needs of a site and where conservators and heritage recording
experts can better align their goals and efforts in the interest of
preserving cultural heritage.

1.3

Digital Documentation

3D documentation, encompassing such recording and capture
methods as laser scanning and photogrammetry, is one approach
to collecting information and should be viewed as a component
of the overall documentary record for a site. The specific role
that 3D technology can play in the digital strategy for a site
needs to be clearly defined and looked at in relation to the
overarching conservation objectives.
Has the migration, adoption and reliance of 3D technology and

2. THE TWO TOMBS OF TUTANKHAMEN
2.1

Project Intent

Tutankhamen’s tomb was originally constructed (c. 1323 BCE)
as a burial place and house of eternity for a deceased young
pharaoh.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-1145-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

1146

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

Figure 5. The northeast corner of the burial chamber of the
tomb of Tutankhamen, Valley of the Kings
© J. Paul Getty Trust 2015

Figure 6. The northeast corner of the burial chamber of the
facsimile of the tomb of Tutankhamen
© J. Paul Getty Trust 2019

During the collaborative project to conserve the tomb, between
the Getty Conservation Institute and Egypt’s Ministry of
Antiquities, the principal focus was the design and
implementation of an integrated conservation and management
plan for the tomb and its wall paintings.

(TNPI) between the Factum Foundation and the University of
Basel, “to safeguard the tombs of the Theban Necropolis
through the application of new recording technologies and the
creation of exact facsimiles of tombs that are either closed to the
public for conservation reasons or are in need of closure to
preserve them for future generations”.1

The main objectives of this project were to conserve the tomb
and its wall paintings, by understanding original materials and
techniques of execution and past physical history of the site in
order to stabilize fragile paint layers and remove layers of dust
from the tomb; determine ongoing threats to the tomb and
implement actions to reduce future deterioration by improving
environmental conditions; upgrading infrastructure (lighting,
walkways, viewing platform, barriers, signage and ventilation);
and, undertaking training of staff; and devising a program for
maintenance, monitoring and visitation of the tomb.
The team was composed of Egyptologists to conduct
background research on the tomb; environmental engineers to
investigate microclimatic conditions; microbiologists to study
the brown spots; heritage recording specialists to create a
documentary record; architects and designers to upgrade the
infrastructure; scientists to study the original materials of the
wall paintings; and conservators to carry out condition
recording and treatment and to train local conservators.
The project by the Factum Foundation for Digital Technology
in Conservation, with a team composed of recording specialists,
photographers, artists and conservators, aimed to digitally
capture the original tomb by using a non-contact, reversible
method to preserve the tomb for the future and to produce a
high resolution replica. The resulting Tutankhamen replica was
part of a larger Theban Necropolis Preservation Initiative

Both projects have the same end goal of preserving the tomb for
future generations, however, the ways in which they approach
conservation have conflicting narratives: one advocating for
hands-on conservation, management of visitor numbers and
improvements in environmental conditions of the original tomb,
the other creating a documentary record and offering a facsimile
tomb to visit, all of which is argued as a safer alternative to
preserving the original tomb than traditional forms of
conservation.
2.2

Materiality

The original tomb of Tutankhamen was made by ancient
artisans over 3,000 years ago by chiselling into the limestone
bedrock, coating the walls with clay mixed into a plaster, and
painting images with a palette containing such pigments as
yellow and red ochres and Egyptian blue and green.
The replica, in contrast, was made by modern day artisans using
two-dimensional and three-dimensional high-resolution capture,
then vacuum-adhering digitally printed images onto a milled
and cast resin base that closely mirrors the surface contours of
the original wall.
1

http://www.factumarte.com/resources/files/fa/press_releases/web_tutankhamun_exhibi
tion.pdf

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-1145-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

1147

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

Figure 7. View of the antechamber looking north to the burial
chamber © J. Paul Getty Trust 2015

Figure 8. View of the antechamber looking north to the burial
chamber in the replica tomb © J. Paul Getty Trust 2019

Though the resulting replica has high fidelity in terms of its
geometric form compared to the original with accurately
replicated 3D surface texture, the digitally printed painted
surface provides little information on material composition and
traditional techniques of execution used (see Figure 5-6). Why
was the decision made not to use materials similar to the
original? Because of this difference in material composition, as
the original and replica tomb age the differences between the
two will become more and more apparent.

an object by providing reliable evidence of the past (UNESCO,
1994). Authenticity in the case of the Tutankhamen replica is
primarily focused on replicating the form and design of the
original tomb as well as its use and function by recreating the
same visitor experience.

2.3

Visitor Access

The Egyptian authorities have not closed the real tomb so both
tombs remain open. The viewing experience for the visitor in
the replica tomb is remarkably similar to that of the actual tomb.
Visitors are curiously constrained within the replica analogous
to the original tomb: a wooden barrier prevents you from
entering the burial chamber in both tombs (see Figures 7-8).
Again, the goal seems to be for achieving accuracy but this time
of the experience. Whereas the original tomb has crafted its
visitors’ experience according to an assessed need to prevent
further mechanical damage to vulnerable wall paintings, the
replica should be under no similar threat. Yet, the replica tomb
of Tutankhamen has constructed barriers to visitors that imitate
those of the original, toward a new goal of attempting to
replicate the visitors’ experience of the original tomb.
Supporters of the replica suggest that the tomb should be closed
for its protection, while those involved in the study of the
original tomb believe that the tomb can be kept open if the risks
to the tomb are properly managed. How viable is it for the
Egyptian authorities to close the original tomb? And, can
visitors be persuaded to visit the replica instead?

3. DISCUSSION
3.1

Authenticity

The Tutankhamen replica is said by Factum Arte to redefine the
relationship between originality and authenticity but at the same
time it is not trying to deceive the visitor into believing it is the
original. Article 13 in the Nara Document on Authenticity lists
the various categories on which authenticity can be understood
which include form and design, materials and substance, use
and function, traditions and techniques, location and setting,
and spirit and feeling which retain the cultural significance of

3.2

Accuracy

The replica places great emphasis on accuracy. The Factum
Foundation claims that Tutankhamen was the highest resolution
facsimile project to date that set new standards for replica
fabrication. Using a 3D-scanning system custom built for this
undertaking, they captured the tomb geometry to a 100 micron
resolution. Additionally, recording of the painted surfaces with
photographs was done 1:1 at 600-800 DPI (Foundation for
Digital Technology in Conservation, 2009).
However, despite the quest for accuracy, the tomb was
documented in 2009, prior to its conservation, when the
paintings were covered with dust. Since then the paintings have
been cleaned as part of the conservation work. Based on the
timing of capture, the replica now preserves for posterity a
record not only of the painting, but also of the obfuscation of
the paintings by dust. Accuracy here is time dependent and
despite the technological advancements in recording and
capture methods the resulting documentation produces a static
record which captures a single moment in time.
With the speed of technology advancements, how soon do our
records become obsolete? Do we need to scan and capture
again? Tutankhamen’s tomb was documented again in 2017,
following the completion of the conservation work, by Carleton
Immersive Media Studio at Carleton University working in
collaboration with the Getty Conservation Institute.
3.3

Digital Strategies and Access

The Factum Foundation has done an admirable job in handing
over files to Egyptian authorities, creating a digital archive,
providing equipment and transferring technological knowledge
of their process through training. However, in general, many
questions regarding digital strategies and access have emerged
from the increase in 3D recording and capture of cultural
heritage sites.
With significant post-processing work often required and the
creation of diverse data formats and large file size there is a

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-1145-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

1148

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

need to ensure metadata standards, technical rigour and
transparency of how the data is produced and establish
protocols for maintaining data in order to safeguard future
access.
ICOM’s International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC)
says that “comprehensive approaches are still widely missing.
The lack of digital strategies that encompass all digital activities
of a museum results in inefficiencies, lack of defined priorities
and unwisely spent resources.”2
Few organizations have issued codes of ethics, principles and
standards relating to the use of digital technology in cultural
heritage and say little on the topic of replicas (Santana Quintero
et al., Forthcoming 2019; Khunti, 2018).
The London Charter for the computer-based visualisation of
cultural heritage seeks to establish principles in the research and
communication of cultural heritage.3 Initiatives such as ReACH
(Reproduction of Art and Cultural Heritage) launched in 2017
led by the V&A in partnership with the Peri Charitable
Foundation, and in which the Factum Foundation plays a role,
“explores how to re-think our approach to reproducing, storing
and sharing works of art and cultural heritage”.4
Though the cultural heritage field is aware of the issues and
need to create digital strategies without a clear path forward the
push toward 3D technology and the increase in replica use can
be viewed as brazen and irresponsible if the longevity of this
amassed data is not assured.

in cultural heritage it is time for supranational organizations like
UNESCO, ICOMOS and ICOM to take the lead in providing
guidance in these areas with impartial and transparent
involvement from the heritage recording field.

5. CONCLUSION
We are continually reminded about heritage at risk—the fear of
destruction by war or terrorist acts; the threat of future loss from
natural disasters, fire, development creep and neglect: all of
these give us a sense of urgency and pushes us to act. But for
whom? Why? And, how? In the case of Tutankhamen and other
sites we need to ask these important questions.
Technology developments over the past two decades have
allowed us to capture, record and replicate heritage sites faster,
cheaper, and with increasingly higher resolution than ever
before. But, there are now numerous digital initiatives all vying
for attention and funding: the competition is fierce and the
resources slim.
How could the conservation approaches between these two
projects in Tutankhamen’s tomb been better aligned? Why was
a decision made to create a replica and who was involved in this
process? The current trend to record cultural heritage using 3D
technology though offering many benefits can also overshadow
other conservation needs. Instead, the use of 3D technology and
the decision of whether or not to produce a replica should be
seen and discussed as part of the larger documentation record
and conservation strategy for a site.

4. DECISION-MAKING
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The questions that have arisen from this exploration of the two
tombs of Tutankhamen prompt us to also ask who should be
part of the discussion and decision-making regarding replicas
and the use of 3D technology. Presumably, the users: the
owners, the educators, the researchers, the public and the many
other stakeholders who will engage with the replica in some
way and of course us, as professionals coming from the
conservation and heritage recording fields.

The authors wish to thank members of the Tutankhamen project
team from Egypt’s Ministry of Antiquities, the Getty
Conservation Institute and Carleton Immersive Media Studio,
Carleton University for their support.

REFERENCES

However, Addison (2001) notes that “more often than not, those
responsible for recording, preserving, and teaching about
culture have not been part of this digital revolution”. Today, the
discourse on this topic has not been entirely democratic and
equitable and our own professional self-interest overshadows
other voices. Arguably, the creators of the replicas have had and
will continue to have the stronger voice due to the technology
gap that often exists and that we are the ones generally driving
the discussion. The danger with this is that there is no one to
oversee the use of 3D technology and replicas in the field of
cultural heritage and it instead becomes controlled by those
coming from the heritage recording sector. In this environment
it becomes hard to maintain neutrality and in some cases the
mantra of technology in the service of cultural heritage can be
put in jeopardy.

Addison, Alonzo C., 2001. Virtual heritage: technology in the
service of culture in VAST '01 Proceedings of the 2001
conference on virtual reality, archeology, and cultural heritage
held November 28 - 30, 2001, Glyfada, Greece, 343-354.

Given the prevalence of the use of 3D technology and replicas

Khunti, R., 2018. The Problem with Printing Palmyra:
Exploring the Ethics of Using 3D Printing Technology to
Reconstruct
Heritage.
SDH,
2,
1,
1-12.
DOI:
10.14434/sdh.v2i1.24590.

2

http://network.icom.museum/cidoc/working-groups/digitalstrategy-development/
3
http://www.londoncharter.org/objectives.html
4
https://www.vam.ac.uk/research/projects/reach-reproductionof-art-and-cultural-heritage#overview

Factum Arte and The Foundation for Digital Technology in
Conservation, The authorized facsimile of the burial chamber of
Tutankhamun with sarcophagus, sarcophagus lid and the
missing fragment from the south wall http://www.factumarte.com/resources/files/fa/press_releases/web_tutankhamun_exhibition
.pdf.

Foundation for Digital Technology in Conservation, 2009.
Factum Arte’s Work in the Tombs of Tutankhamun, Nefertari
and Seti I, March-May 2009 Report for the Supreme Council of
Antiquities.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-1145-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

1149

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W11, 2019
GEORES 2019 – 2nd International Conference of Geomatics and Restoration, 8–10 May 2019, Milan, Italy

Santana Quintero, M., Fai, S., Smith, L. Duer, A., Barazzetti,
L., forthcoming 2019. Ethical framework for heritage recording
specialists applying digital workflows for conservation, Int.
Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci.
UNESCO, 1994. Nara Document on Authenticity. Experts
meeting, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation, Paris.

This contribution has been peer-reviewed.
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W11-1145-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.

1150

